If I can
call this public meeting to order on Tuesday, April 7th,
2026,
and I'll ask the superintendent to take the role.
DeAngelis.
Here.
Dowling.
Feller.
Here.
Holman.
Richardson.
Here.
Rish.
Smith.
Here.
Cabissa.
Davison.
Thank you.
As this is a public proceeding,
unless the Board of Education specifically votes to go into executive
session, the public has the right to hear everything and to look at
all exhibits. Please let us know if you experience any difficulties
with accessibility. Members of the district staff are located in the
lecture hall, and they can provide assistance.
The school board works from prepared agenda,
which is posted in advance on the district website, and printed copies
are available near the entrance of the lecture hall.
Fellow board members to please be advised that Robert's Rules of Order
states that members may speak no more than twice on the same question at any one
meeting, except by permission of the chair.
Questions, brief suggestions, or points of clarification are not counted as
speaking in debate. The board asks the public audience
to please refrain from clapping, booing, or side
comments, or other behaviors that could interrupt the flow of
speakers. Every person is entitled to speak their opinion and to feel
safe
in the process.
I wanted to start with
beginning with briefly addressing our last meeting.
Public participation matters,
and we welcome strong opinions and passionate
advocacy. That's what gives this board a sense of where
community sentiment lies on important policy decisions.
But last meeting, we fell short.
The disrespect, the tone, it crossed a line, and that's not who we
are as a community.
I fell short as well, and I apologize to the public for failing to
manage the meeting in a better way.
Here in South Portland, we know we can do better.
Everyone in the room is here for the same reason. It's because we care.
We care about our kids, we care about our schools, and we care about how much it
costs to provide a high-quality education.
No one has to be here.
We choose to be here. That shared commitment could bring out the best in us,
and our students are watching. They're learning how adults handle disagreement, how
we treat and show respect for others, and how we work through hard issues
together. Let's model what that looks like.
So tonight, we offer a sincere invitation as we work to finalize a
budget for our kids. Let's bring our best thinking, our strongest
facts, and our creativity. Let's listen to understand, not
just to respond. Let's challenge ideas without tearing people down.
If we do that, we'll be better for it, and so will our schools.
That's the standard. Let's all meet it together. Thank you guys so much.
I turn it over to you, Mr. Superintendent.
Can you advance that slide?
Good evening.
Thank you for letting me help to reset our
dialogue and our interactions for tonight and
from here on in.
I want to review the board's norms and ask that we
all share the responsibility for upholding
them.
They're up here behind me.
They're pretty easy and straightforward. A quick review.
Active listening is when you pay attention to what others are saying and show that
you're engaged even when you disagree.
This can include asking clarifying questions and certainly
avoiding interruptions.
Acknowledging contributions. This may
be finding just something that you recognize in somebody else's
work, or ideas, or efforts, or contributions,
and noticing it and letting them
know that you notice.
Showing empathy,
being mindful of feelings, views, experiences,
and opinions of others. Again, even if you don't agree with that
perspective.
Attempting to be mindful of the value of every individual,
regardless of their background, experiences, beliefs, or
their actions.
Civility, that's a important word when we're talking about
public engagement, and that's being mindful of others'
boundaries and privacy, and treating them with kindness.
I think kindness is a really important word.
Avoiding premature judgment, and that's when we refrain from making
judgments or assumptions about others based on limited
information.
I guess my message tonight is,
I'm committed, and I hope everybody else is,
to all work harder to be kinder, and
presume positive intentions from our colleagues
and from our neighbors.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Dr. Altmusel.
And we're up to the budget update.
Good evening. I'm Johanna Prince, assistant superintendent.
And will provide the budget update before the board begins
their discussion and hosts public comment.
A key update since we last met,
actually, we met last Thursday,
was on Friday, we learned about our health insurance increase.
You'll recall that we spoke about the fact, at that point, we were holding
11.5% increase. And on Friday, we
found out that that was 5.14%
instead,
which meant that we had about
655,000 that was already allocated to the
local budget
that we could think differently about, and hence wanted to
present to the board for consideration
prior to a conversation with city council, as this may impact
your thinking.
So I want to talk because the board has mentioned over and over,
and the public has also talked about, how do we build a path
towards financial stability and the fund
balance.
And so just wanted to provide information to
everyone that Maine law currently limits
undesignated fund balance to 9% of the prior
year's operating budget.
So again, for South Portland, to put it in terms of what we
might be looking to restore, over 6
million is a figure for that.
Prior to COVID, it was a 5% threshold, and then it
has since been increased, and the legislature has maintained
that.
And so tonight I'm going to talk about three different things, fund balance,
reserves, and contingency, and I'm going to try and walk the board and the public
through what's the difference of those dollars.
So a reserve fund is not held within our local
fund. It is sort of a different bank account, if you will.
And when the board takes action to allocate
dollars to a reserve account, they do so with a
designated purpose. Most often, this
is for capital improvement projects.
When you take action on a reserve fund,
it requires a board meeting to both allocate those
dollars and then to expend those
dollars. So again, just thinking about it is a
more limited,
more protected, and sort of more precautions.
And it is a consideration the board could use for how to
create some financial stability.
However, the reserve fund is not the same thing as an undesignated
fund balance. So that's what I want to try and talk through here.
So the way that fund balance
is built is if we have
unspent local fund dollars in a given year,
after we close out that fiscal year, if there is
a surplus,
those funds are carried forward
and held in what we are calling fund balance.
There's not a mechanism whereby the board can
directly deposit into that safe. It
passes through the local budget if you want to
seed fund balance.
So your mechanism for that, if that's the route the board would like
to go, is to have dollars in our
contingency local budget in the
FY27 year.
We would add those dollars into the cost centers where
emergency needs are most likely in
FY27, because, again, we always have to meet our current fiscal
year obligations first before we can carry forward.
If those dollars are unspent by the time we close out the books on
FY27,
that then becomes the undesignated fund balance for
FY28 and beyond.
So again, the administration's recommendation to the
board is that this is the route that the
board consider
and thereby increase the likelihood of building fund
balance by holding dollars in contingency during
FY27.
Madam Chair, would it be okay if I paused for questions from the
board there?
Absolutely, yes.
Questions of Member Smith?
So the contingencies would be under a
specific cost center, and
let's say in another cost center, we go over budget.
Does that contingency then get used on that
piece?
Sure. For Maine law,
you can transfer across cost centers if
it's less than 5% of the total
allocation for that cost center. So in cost center
one, which I think is around 27 million, that's obviously a very
big dollar figure. In cost center 11, which is down
under 700,000 now, that's a much smaller figure.
If for some reason the board found itself in a position where it did
need to make that transfer, it is allowable, but it does
take citizen vote, not board vote.
So again, that's where we would want to be really thoughtful
about where we've put those dollars.
And again, those are typically going to be in your facility and your big
personnel.
Right. Yeah.
Member Richardson.
I think I had
a spaced out moment, and I apologize.
Can you explain to me the difference between the reserve and contingency?
Sure. So, it's essentially two different checking accounts,
if you will.
Reserves are set in a particular account that you can
only use for the purpose which you designate it.
So again, it could be technology, it could be capital improvement,
and it sort of protects those dollars,
but it takes a different action to withdraw those
dollars from that fund. Contingency, on the other hand, sits
within our operating budget, and therefore, as we have
needs, we have more staff who are out on leave, and therefore, we have
a higher sub-cost. Those dollars are already in our local budget
and can accommodate
some of that risk.
Again, what the recommendation here is, though, we would hold them in
contingency of hopes of not using them-
Right
... next year, such that we're increasing that likelihood of
transfer into undesignated fund balance in future years.
Which is different from the reserve how?
I guess that's where I'm getting-
Two different accounts. Reserves you have to use for a
certain purpose. Undesignated fund balance can become kind of
seed money for future years.
Okay. Is there a way for the board to consider some kind
of policy that requires oversight on use of contingency
funds?
What you actually would be doing is once we rebuild that piggy bank, you
actually, I would recommend, would consider
policy around how you use your undesignated fund balance.
Right now, the issue is we have zero.
I understand, but for the next year-
Yes
... if we are looking at putting...
Because there are
some of us that want to consider a tax increase to create and
build back a fund balance. So, I feel like there are some
contingencies attached to the district's
use of those funds, and I think the board should have a little bit more
oversight than normal
to understand
if the contingency balances are more than what you've
put here because we are asking for a higher increase or whatever.
I think I'd like to have the board's eyes on
when
and why we're-- And I don't know if that's something that the finance committee,
Abigail's leading. Yeah.
Yeah. I think we can do a better job of making sure
that that's front and center in the finance committee and making sure we are
updating you. I do not think technically the board
legally could restrict their use if they're in there, but I can check
on that. Abigail, do you have anything else you want to add?
We just need some transparency-
Absolutely
... on that, I think. Yeah.
Oh, yeah. Abigail Ketchen, Director of Finance, hello.
I think the transparency piece is no problem because we could put the
contingency in a very specific account string.
It's easy to report on that and can update every month.
Okay.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Mm-hmm.
Do you have further questions?
Member Richardson, you're all set?
I might have another one if-
Yes. No, go ahead.
I'm thinking.
Oh, you're thinking about it.
Yeah. Okay. Thank you. Sorry.
That's fine. Member Fell.
Go for it.
So, if we raised some lump sum with additional tax
revenue, would you distribute that across cost centers,
or would you isolate it in a single cost center going forward?
Again, I think we would want to likely look at probably the
three
cost centers that have the most variables in them, which again,
tend to be facilities, and then our high personnel
items, which are cost centers one and two.
Got it. Okay. That's helpful.
Member Holmes.
Thank you. Couple of comprehension questions.
So, fund balance versus
contingency?
Contingency comes before fund balance.
Okay. So contingency, if we don't spend it, like we don't have too many subs or
whatever it is, some's left over, and then automatic to go to fund
balance?
Correct.
Okay.
After the books are closed, it is swept into undesignated fund balance.
Okay, good. And then my next question is,
a reserve account has to be created, but it doesn't exist.
The fund balance exists. It's a fact of
life. My understanding is a reserve account is not.
Or does it exist already?
The board currently has, I think it might be about eight
reserves.
There's not a lot of money in them. But certainly, if that was a
direction the board wanted to go, we could provide you more information about
that to see if, again, I'm remembering
there was a school construction one, there was a capital
improvement,
technology. Again, if that was the direction the board wanted to go, we could give
you an update, and you could then consider which of those.
If there was not an account that was
appropriate to what you wanted to hold those dollars for, you
all can create a new one. It is possible.
But takes board action.
Member Richardson.
Did I hear you say there's actual dollars in those reserve funds right now?
Yeah.
Just not a lot.
Abigail will tell you how many dollars.
Yeah.
Okay.
Pennies.
Some cases, they're in deficits.
Yeah.
Okay, so the reserve accounts. So the school fund is 0150.
Everything gets held there for the school. We have these other reserve funds.
Yes, we can create a new reserve fund for a designated purpose.
There's some pros and cons, I think, with the reserve fund.
What Jo mentioned was all correct, and that all
works when you have
stability and financial leadership.
We have reserve funds that haven't been tended to in many years, so we
do have reserve funds that are in deficit. We have continued cleanup to do.
So, kind of a con is adding to a pile
that needs-... clean up.
Yes.
Okay. And if you do that, you have to have financial leadership
solidly moving forward. Once that's not tended to,
things go awry. It has been
expended from those accounts
wi- without the oversight that we've described here.
Okay, so
there's kind of a con in that way, and now it's sort of stuck there.
The benefit to contingency is that it protects you both in your current fiscal
year, should actual emergencies arise.
And then if all goes well and you land with a surplus, then it will
just become part of your fund balance.
Now, this year it's a little bit tricky, right?
Because FY26, we are projecting a deficit.
So because we have no fund balance, we are going to draw from the city's fund
balance. They will want that back, pending whatever other discussions may
happen. So it's also, will that just go
towards this year's deficit? That's unclear, but that's
for a broader discussion.
So there are pros and cons to both.
So I'm sorry, are there any dollars in any reserve fund?
There are some sort of for very restricted, specific
purposes.
And
can we understand what those are?
Mm-hmm.
Is there a way to make that public or under like-
Oh, yeah.
No, I-
No, I could go back and prepare and show the various balances and
deficits that we have.
It doesn't help us-
Okay
... this fiscal year.
Yeah, I'm not implying-
Like-
... you didn't look in those accounts and confirm that we couldn't use them.
It's just-
Mm-hmm
... it would be nice to understand what they are and what they could be-
Oh, yeah
... used for.
Yeah.
And what amounts they hold.
Mm-hmm.
What is a
school budget best practice for contingency balances when you're
looking at the various cost centers?
And what
does gold standard look like, and what
does this proposal
support in terms of a s- like-
I think we're-
... where are we on the spectrum of good, better, best or?
I think we have potential to get better every year.
Having a contingency, having a buffer is protective
financially-
Mm-hmm
... if something happens.
Mm-hmm.
That's always a good thing.
It's hard to go wrong with having a buffer.
Think of your own household, it's hard to go wrong to have some savings.
Did we not have buffer? Did we just not have contingency
buffers, for lack of a better description in prior budgets?
No, anything that I found that was labeled contingency was actually for a very
specific purpose. So there was
some accounts mislabeled as contingency, but actually they were for something.
No, we don't have-
Okay
... extra buffers this year. Yeah.
Thank you.
If... Yeah. Okay. Yeah. So the contingency
Excuse me. So the contingency fund, that's something
that becomes...
So it hasn't been a line item, and now it should be?
I-
So we have to decide, like, okay, this is our contingency fund and this is how much
we're allocating to it. It doesn't have any automatic process by which
anything happens, right?
Oh, no. We're proposing to add the contingencies in our
budget. So in the proposed budget, I've added it in for your
consideration.
Yeah.
Yep.
And again, with the transparency piece, I can certainly report on that every
month. That's no problem at all.
As noted. Yes. Thank you.
Other questions?
I only had one. It was just with regard to
specifying something, like we know that we have the
issue coming up
for the skill in HVAC. So
would you recommend that a certain percentage
of this money goes into contingency, and
is earmarked for that purpose or no?
When I think of the full cost of what a boiler could be, I
wouldn't see us making much of a dent in that with the
contingency that we're proposing.
And the only reason I was asking is because
Mr. Nally did talk about that that could be done in
phases. So I just... And I don't know, he would know better about how
much you would need for a phase, but is that something we're considering?
Sure. What I think for this budget that I talked to Mr.
Nally about is that this budget,
the dollars that we are kind of holding in contingency would most
likely be if we had some sort of massive failure during
the course of next winter, and we needed to rent
an emergency backup system and do some construction to
bring that online so that we didn't have to move those
students.
Mm-hmm.
So that's what we talked about being in the FY27, with
then building towards, again, maybe a phased approach over
coming years, either through bond or local budget, the sort of the
larger
replacement of the system.
Thank you. That makes sense.
Yep.
Any other questions at this point or
Dr. Prince continue? Okay.
All right. I will continue on with our- ... proposal here.
So
what we are bringing tonight for the board's consideration
is keeping in mind that
655,000 that we
have learned that we can allocate to the local budget.
Our recommendation would be that you place just about
30% of it into those contingency lines we
discussed.
We
Would advocate for about 36% to go towards
SPTA positions and time beyond contract.
What time beyond contract means that if we were to invite
teachers to do summer work this year with
reconfiguration, it would have to be optional, but that would be paid
time, and some of those dollars that are in that line
would help support that summer work if there were teachers who chose to
participate so that they would be paid per their contract.
And then just under 20% for SPESA,
which is our ed techs, clerks, and office manager unit.
And then, likewise, the same amount of dollars
towards the service.
The proposal that you have in front of you does not have any additional
dollars to SPAA, which is our administrators, our
non-bargaining non-director roles or director roles.
Breaking that into a little bit more detail.
Contingency we've spoken about, so I won't cover that.
The elementary school focus,
we know that in the FY27 budget, that
is where the largest potential impact is.
So a recommendation to bring back
two classroom teaching positions.
Exact grade level to be determined as we see enrollment,
but to reduce class size.
We would advocate that those are posted as one-year only positions.
However, they would still be subject to the recall and the
Article 18 provisions of the contract.
In addition,
we would recommend reinstating two special education ed techs.
Again, exact school to be determined, but they
would be at that elementary school.
I think I'm going to jump down to the middle bullet there.
Or actually, excuse me, down to the bottom bullet there.
Did want to point out a few other changes that are financially
neutral but do impact the blue pieces of paper I've put at
your seats this evening.
We do have 171,000
in additional allocation for EPS for
pre-K programming,
but that directly corresponds to our
expenses. So it's a passthrough amount
for our Head Start classroom.
If we chose to not move forward with the Head Start classroom,
we would not retain that revenue. So it's
neutral to how it impacts local programming.
And then as we reflected on where the
75,000 that we have allocated for potential moving
expenses of
physically moving things with reconfiguration, that
had been in cost center 11, but really where we
would be paying those bills from would come out of our facilities.
So again, it's not a change in dollars, but is a change in which cost
center those dollars sit in, just on reflecting on where that bill would
actually be charged to.
Excuse me. Last week, we heard in our meeting, and this has
been
partially confirmed from Augusta, that there is
this potential emergency appropriation.
What we believe to be true is that that would represent
152,000 of additional funding,
given our students who
qualify for free and reduced lunch, and then
150,000 to support our McKinney-Vento
homeless
youth.
These dollars are not yet in our state allocation,
so these are potential dollars.
However, since we have some indication that they should be coming,
the recommendation in front of you this evening is, should these come
forward, and again, I don't believe you can vote on
prospective dollars, but it's more to plant the seed of a future
conversation.
The other positions that we believe would be worthy for
consideration,
and also would be posted as one year,
would be elementary behavior support.
We would be looking at that as a board-certified behavior analyst,
excuse me,
and then
increasing one SPTA related arts teacher at the middle
school,
and then a recommendation of additional contingency
should we come back to a situation where we're considering
that. And I do think it's important for the board to
understand what action today means.
Action today means that
if you are ready, you are passing
a budget to city council.
You actually have to come back and revote the
actual warrant articles that are what go on
the referendum,
and it is not uncommon in other districts
and in other years that what you take action on
tonight and what the final dollar figures are on those warrant
articles, there is the potential for change.
So again, I think understanding that you
can vote to pass the budget forward this evening
if you so choose
so that you could present the board's budget next week to city council,
engage in dialogue with them if you choose.
There is still the potential that the board
can revise should we learn we have new dollars available that you
can adjust before you take that final vote on the
warrants
themselves.This
paper here matches one of the blue papers that the board has in front of
them that just shows you the allocation of dollars
across the cost centers, adjusted representing the
changes that we've just recommended this
evening.
And then,
again, this budget still keeps us with a
less than 6%
local tax increase.
And so that is the update we wanted to provide on the
superintendent's budget
as you consider whether you will move forward with
a vote this evening.
This paper here.
Oh. Are there any questions I can answer-
Questions for Jill
... before you...
Member Feller.
Yeah. I can start it off.
Can we go to the forecasted revenue slide?
Yep.
As a novice, can you tell me what TIF means?
Sure. Tax incentive fund. Those are dollars that are
appropriated often in the sort of upfront of a construction project.
There is a plan whereby the city reaps
some tax benefits for a construction project,
and that is from the Brick Hill construction.
I don't know the exact year on it, but
those are dollars that sort of are promised to us
after a significant construction, is typically the mechanism.
Significant construction, so
construction of-
Of us
... a school?
No. So, when a developer wants
to put in to sort of make that package more available to the
city where they are developing, that sometimes can be a
mechanism to
sort of help
make it an effective partnership.
Oh, great. Okay. So, that is something potentially that we could
talk to city council about when we meet with them next.
Are there new tax incentive funds available?
Sure. I think that's always worth a conversation, and certainly,
we've met with the city planner.
And
that's definitely a conversation that the board
should be involved in as the city is looking at potential other
projects. There have been questions in
earlier public comments about are there major
developments. Right now,
according to the city's planner, there's
not major
family units in development, but
certainly worth a conversation.
Got it.
And this was new to me, that we bill MaineCare-
Mm-hmm
... which is Maine's Medicare program, right?
Mm-hmm.
So we're billing them $70,000 for services rendered to our
students.
To what degree can we
squeeze more dollars out of that billing?
Because just quickly looking across the state, and I know Portland
has a full-time staff position with billing MaineCare, so
it's very labor intensive. But they bill, and they provide more services than we
do, 600,000 last year. And even Rockland, which I think has a
smaller population than we have, billed
MaineCare for half a million. So,
I don't know.
Sure. I think that's worthy of exploration.
In the teachers' contract this year, there is
a stipend now for those teachers who are
billing MaineCare, in part because that is
additional work that they need to do to support that.
But I think that's certainly worth
exploration to see if we're maximizing the potential
there.
I'm sorry, can I just clarify that?
Please.
Can you just explain to me what we would be billing Medicare for?
Sure. So if a child's family is
eligible for MaineCare and they're receiving speech or
occupational therapy or another service, that service can
be billed for even though it's being provided during the school day.
Got it. Thank you.
Yep.
And who's currently responsible for that?
Is there a staff member whose role that is?
The individual teachers right now are currently responsible for
submitting those. Is that answering your question?
Yeah.
We also have some administrative staff who work with
a vendor who performs the billing.
Got it.
Yeah.
They report their hours.
Mm-hmm.
Cool. That's helpful. I'm going to let somebody else ask questions.
Yeah. Other questions?
Right here. I'm sorry, Member Holman.
That's fine.
Are you-
That's fine. So I just want to review-
Mm-hmm
... about the TIF. The thing about the TIF is that it's that because, for
example, Brick Hill brings in students and we're going to serve those students,
that's why the TIF allocates money to us. Right?
That's basically, I think, the rationale behind it.
That is the case in other places. Another community where I worked from,
it was a large
producer that put a factory there with the idea that the folks
working there would have families.
Right.
So it can be a less direct connection.
Yeah.
But yeah.
A connection.
Yeah.
And I've also learned that only TIFs with affordable housing-
Mm-hmm
... are what would support the school.
So other TIFs out there would not benefit us.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
Member Smith.
With the additional state dollars,
do we have any general sense of when we'll have a firm confirmation?
So like a week, a month?
So the communication that I saw around the first bullet, the
152,000 referenced that those might be
visible in our allocation towards the end of
next week. But again, I do not have that
officially.
Okay.
And then in terms of treating
that money for one year only positions,
I definitely see for the two classroom teachers why
one year only would make sense for enrollment fluctuation.
Would the intent be, hey, we're being conservative here about what
funds we might have for next year, and
we want to keep those teachers ideally?
Is that-
Absolutely.
We are trying to be cautious so that we
set ourselves up for the best possible position.
Absolutely, we've had situations where we change one-year positions into
multi-year positions.
But we think this would be a prudent way to go about these dollars,
given that we don't yet know
exactly how the new funding model will work next year.
There's some indication that there will be more dollars,
but we want to buffer against that.
Okay.
Member Richardson.
Just a clarification off of that question.
As we bring teachers back
or bring people back off the recall list,
does the seniority,
do they retain the seniority that they had?
Yes.
Or do they have to, are they starting like-
If someone is in a one-year position-
Yeah
... do they keep their seniority?
Yeah.
That has been the way we've treated it, but that would be a conversation with our
association partners to make sure that we all felt very clear on
that.
Meaning, sorry, just to be very clear.
They don't reset.
They don't reset. Okay.
Correct. That is what I think we would take and how I read the
contract. My association partners would help me with that, though.
Okay.
The
$750,000 for moving costs,
plus this potential
cont-
75,000.
75. What did I say?
750.
Oh, my God. Sorry. You heard it first.
No, that's not what I meant. 75,000
plus potential contingency funds being paid
in an unknown amount
to offer to teachers this summer.
I went and looked. We're getting a lot of questions about the
cost of reconfiguration, and I don't
think we have a clear cost estimate for that.
I did go back and look at the original
plan, where the proposals 1.1 through
1.9, and
closure of Kaylor and/or Dyer and reconfigure four schools was
quoted at 125,000.
Whereas,
closure of Kaylor and redistricting was quoted at 60,000.
So the cost was...
And I know we've evolved in our understanding of how this is going to work.
I just really want to get a better, clearer answer
on
the cost. Are we going to dip into contingency
funds to, because we don't know how much it
costs or?
Again, based on the quotes that we have for moving
and-
Beyond moving.
All I see is 75,000 for moving costs.
But my understanding is we might not
necessarily have bathrooms where they need to be.
It's those kinds of costs that scare me
that we don't understand, given how intense of
a budget this is for us. It's really having a hard time not
knowing what those numbers are.
Sure. And I don't
think it's wise for us to try and do those on the fly right now.
I didn't realize that was something the board was looking for us to present on
tonight, so we don't have a slide
prepared for that.
But to
be fair, that question has been asked a number of times.
So I'm not trying to surprise you at all right now.
No, I'm just saying I don't want to...
Again, I feel with the 100,000 that we have in the budget for
moving and teacher time and the additional contingency
that we are recommending, that we
feel prepared.
Which is, sorry, what is the additional...
So you just said 100,000 plus, what is the additional contingency that we're rec-
180,000, 179,000.
Looking at a potential almost $300,000 cost for
reconfiguration?
No, I'm saying 300,000, that's 180,000 in
contingency
that is available to you. We do not anticipate
that. Classrooms are not required to have an interior bathroom.
They're required to have a bathroom within 40 feet.
Right.
And again, we've done the building analysis on that.
Does that mean
every consideration has been made? No.
We know there will be some things that we run into that we need to adjust
to.
I'll go ahead, Member Feller. I'll ask another question in a little bit.
Yeah. So Eleni's talking about this time beyond contract.
So,
for this budgeted time beyond contract, for how many
teachers have we included in our estimates, and how many
days or hours have we allocated for each teacher?
So there's two different time beyond contract
provisions. There's what already was in the budget that you were looking at,
and that's $250,000
that's not related to the money you're looking at here.
Mm-hmm.
That $250,000 is to meet the provisions of the
25/28 contract that we agreed on with the
teachers. That's for the meetings beyond 15
hours,
lunch, prep time, field trips, substituting.
Mm-hmm.
The money that we are looking at for summer work
here will be determined...
Again, I think it will be around
$15,000. It will be exactly
determined by who the individuals are that fill those
positions. Because, again, based on seniority and
lane,
and different insurances,
the actual value of the positions may
change.
Yeah.
You said 15 for... Okay.
If we're requiring, how many classrooms would
have to change with reconfiguration?
I mean,
do you have a ballpark, like 20,
30? Would that be that many teachers?
We don't because we have not yet sat down with the
association to talk about who's moving, who's not moving,
how that's going to be done. So we don't have--
When we ballparked how much to hold for who needs to
move,
we said it's safe to assume everyone might have to move because that's
reasonable. I don't think that's going to be what we actually do.
It's not what I would recommend.
But from a budgeting standpoint, if it's a $250
stipend
for teachers, we need to budget for that.
It seems like 15 would be low, and I'm
not trying to make a point here. I'm really trying to say,
I've heard teachers say moving classrooms is like moving a house.
It takes time.
So I think 15 might be low, but I haven't run the numbers myself, so...
But we've already contractually negotiated what moving a classroom
costs. That's $250. That's agreed
upon in the contract.
Oh, got it. Okay, I'm missing that. Thank you.
So that part we're not guessing at.
The time that I'm referencing would be if we are gathering
folks who want to work on third-grade curriculum, folks who want to work on opening
school.
Okay.
That kind of
more ad hoc
work during the summer.
So the teachers are getting compensated $250 when they move their classroom?
Correct.
Got it. Okay.
That's been negotiated through the contract process.
Perfect.
Member Holmer?
No, at this time.
Okay. Member Smith.
And to be clear, if we did not reconfigure, a lot of that work
would still have to happen because many of the teams would change with the closing
of Kaylor.
Correct.
Yep.
I don't know. That feels a little leading to me.
I don't know that we know that to be true. Do we know that to be true?
Because I did just quote two very different figures,
120,000 versus $60,000. So there has to
have been some idea that one-- I mean, at one point we thought it was less
expensive.
We are doing the best to put an estimate in front of you.
I think it's a reminder that tonight you are voting on a budget-
... that we believe will support us with
the option that we have in front of us.
If the board is choosing to reconsider
reconfiguration, that's a lot of re's in the same sentence.
That I think is something that would be outside of the
current budget that is in front of you, that we have an obligation-
Yeah
... to
continue to work on that budget.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah, I don't disagree with that at all, and I do think that
reconfiguration is not a budget discussion, and I've said that
a lot.
Yes.
But we are really strapped financially, and we
are having to consider some of those costs without knowing
the full details of what things cost. And that's really hard.
And I know that's hard for you all, too.
Nobody's trying to surprise--
I'm really trying to be respectful here.
But I just see these costs and I think about these teachers that aren't going to be
able to be in a classroom with our kids, and it makes me want to pull my hair out
because to me, those are the most important people-
Sure
... in a school district.
I do want to talk about the 119 funding towards
SEA Meet and Consult.
Yep.
Can we get some-- I mean, I know and we've had a lot of feedback- ...
from bus drivers about the custodial work and-
Yep
... I don't necessarily see a change presented in the budget tonight to address
those concerns. So what are we thinking the
$119,000 is going to be used for?
Sure. And I think,
again, all of our associations have been involved in
Meet and Consult and have
the rights to provide input on
the proposals in front of you. We know that we're in a different place
with SEA in terms of different job
descriptions for custodians and bus drivers, and we are
trying to get around the table and be creative about what solutions are.
But we think those solutions
will cost something. I can't yet forecast
exactly how those dollars will be spent.
I think that's really for the association and management and the board to
continue to work through in the process that they've already started.
So just so I understand it, the proposal continues
to rely on this assumption
that
meet and consult process and potentially the impact bargaining
process will be successful in some way, and we
will be able to convince our bus drivers to do
the extra custodial work. There is an assumption there that that's going to work
out.
Built into this-
No, I think there is a commitment to the meet and consult process, and
a commitment to impact bargaining to see where we land.
We have heard the concern. We want to honor that
concern, and we want to try and work through it with them.
There are likely multiple solutions, and
again, I think a meeting is tomorrow morning to sort of continue
to try and
find a solution. But that is why we've allocated additional
dollars to try and provide
some capacity to find solutions.
So the solution not necessarily could mean
paying somebody else to do the work.
Okay. Absolutely.
Not necessarily the time it's spent around the table, but actually-
No, I'm sorry. Yes
... buying-
No. That is-
Okay. Got it.
Those dollars would go to staffing.
Yep.
Again, whether that is-
I see. Got it. Okay. Thank you.
Additional-
I thought you were talking about-
... custodial or-- I don't know where that team will-
Okay
... land in their process.
Okay.
Other questions? M- member-
Sorry
... Holland. Sorry.
So to go back where we can see contingency and those things, what slide is
that? Ah,
maybe there. Thank you.
So,
that contingency fund and even the time beyond, actually, I want to talk about
the time beyond one.
So if not, would those things flow into the
contingency if they weren't all spent?
Correct. Any dollars, regardless of what they're originally allocated for
in a fiscal year, if they are unspent, they move into undesignated
fund balance.
And
funds from the contingency, how restricted are those in terms of what they can be
spent for? And to be specific, could they ever be spent on
actual staffing teaching positions, for example?
Or-
Certainly there's not restrictions there.
They're in-
Exactly
... your local budget as long as they're within the appropriate cost center for
that expense. Meaning, if we've put all of our dollars
in
cost center 11, debt service,
and we want to provide staff, those are in cost center one.
If it exceeded that 5% threshold, we would have
to do a vote in order to move the dollars.
I think I follow you.
Okay.
So the answer is kind of po- could potentially yes, but not necessarily.
Correct, but I think--
I guess we've heard loud and clear from the board and from the public
that
what we want is more financial stability, and that means
taking less risk in your budgeting.
And so again, it is always tempting to think
about how many dollars should
we squeeze out of the budget to fund positions versus
ensuring we don't find ourselves here again.
And
I really want to find us not here again and fund as
many positions as possible.
Thanks.
Thank you. Other questions? Member Fowler.
I have a question for Superintendent Entwistle.
It's a hard question, and it's why
these particular positions to be reintroduced, right?
And I'm sure that every district administration has
really challenging conversations, but can you just guide us through the
decision-making process on these are really the roles that we want to bring back?
Well, I think that
you really start analyzing the impact on each of
the groups of employees that we have.
And I think that-
... the public and parents have also been drawn towards those
positions that are
student-facing. And I think it's not surprising that we're talking about teachers
and ed techs and a behavioral expert and so on.
So,
that is the largest proportion of
where the work is done with kids. And it's
not surprising to me that that's where we would go to try to start
putting things back if we have the resources to do that.
Got it. That's helpful.
Other questions? Member Richardson.
It feels
like we are taking some risks with some of these cuts.
I'm going to talk about the positions that I talked about last week, these
occupational therapist roles and the behavior
strategist roles, which is now termed something completely different,
which
my understanding is--
Let me start with the occupational strategist roles.
That is a safety issue.
There's sort of some really safe, high
red flag safety issues that the board has been flagged,
but to by number of faculty, kind of going out on a limb, trying to explain to us
the impact of the loss of those positions.
And taking away those roles, which
maybe we're thinking those two ed tech positions might help
support those classrooms or
those groups of students, but I see
potential lawsuits. I see liability.
I see
a riskier decision by getting rid of
those roles. And then same with the behavior
strategist role, which I'd really like to
understandwhy we're not
returning back that position into the budget and
why we've decided to rename the analyst role.
Because
my understanding that we've been overwhelmed with feedback in support of that
role. That role has been explained to me as a
real bridge between general ed and special ed, and a real
lifeline for general ed teachers to
help manage the behaviors of kids right away when they come into
the district before they even have an IEP.
And
so are you envisioning that the BCBA role would be
able to do that? And
because my understanding is that it's always been called a strategist role, and
now we're kind of falling back on this certification as the new title of that
role.
Sure.
And I'd like to understand why we're doing it that way.
Sure. I'll talk first about the occupational therapists, if that's all right.
Currently, we have six functional life skills classroom
in the district. Two of those classrooms use the embedded
OT model, four of them currently do not.
So I think just keeping in mind,
yes, those teams have a very
successful partnership happening, and that model came about because of
ed tech shortages. However, it is not our consistent model in
our other functional life skills classrooms at the elementary level.
And so as we looked at
how we will staff for four schools next year and the
needs of students,
again, that is where the team went back to looking at schedules and
making a recommendation on what model we
should use moving forward.
And the recommendation from the team, and that is
the administrators who work in special education and our building
administrators at the elementary level,
the recommendation was to move back from that
model. We know we have to bring those people around the table and design what
is going to work. But I think just the board needs to know that that
embedded OT model currently doesn't happen in two-thirds of our
elementary classrooms.
So again, that is where the ed techs felt like
they would be a right recommendation to bring forward.
And we have
ed techs to fill those needs right now.
We are staffed for those
needs,
to fill the needs that the occupational therapist was, that
gap. We are staffed for that.
For right now, we're currently in the model that we have, so those occupational
therapists are there.
For next year, this budget
addresses the gap.
Correct. That is what we are
planning for next year.
And we have ed techs in those roles right now.
Sorry, which roles?
So the occupational therapist role, I understand, was sort of like this hybrid
model that we came up with because we didn't have enough ed techs to do
that work. And it turns out it's been actually a really
fantastic model because, and it's probably more expensive,
but
such is life, I guess. But-
Mm-hmm
...
my point is next year we don't have those roles anymore.
Two occupational therapists equate to four, at least under the--
that was the
formula or whatever.
Do we have
enough people to fill the gaps that the occupational
therapists were filling this year in next year's budget?
Are they staffed right now, or are they just open positions?
The two positions that would be added back in in this proposal
are not currently staffed, nor do I believe that there's someone on the recall
list that would be filling them. So those would be two vacancies that we would be
hiring for this summer.
Are they ed tech two or ed tech three roles?
That is one category for us. We try and
hire threes whenever possible, but that is one salary rate between
ed tech two and threes, so we post it as such.
Again, a strong preference for threes because of the sort of additional
responsibilities there.
Okay. But we're posting for roles that potentially those occupational therapists
that we just riffed
were filling.
Sure. Yes. That is a different model.
Okay. That's just what I wanted to understand. Okay.
With regards to the
regular education behavior strategist, that role is new
to the district as of 2023 is when that role was
added to the district. Prior to that, there was not a regular
education behavior strategist to my understanding.
I was here for about a year before that.
There may have been one before. The
position that we are recommending would provide the same
services. We believe that the credential of being a
board-certified behavior analyst
would give us the best support for students to ensure that their
behavior plans, and the consultation,
because of the rigor of that training, we believe that's the
best model. We would still be supporting the model
where a portion of that person's salary is funded through regular
education,
and then a portion through special education so that that role can still
support.
Currently, that's the model we have in two of our seven schools,
is that we have a BCBA
role that is working in that way.
Okay.
Understood. I
guess
we had a person in that role, under the strategist
role, that we could easily recall back if we just posted for the
strategist role, and we're choosing to not do that.
And
I find that really interesting. A
lot of people have reached out to us about this role and explained the
impact.
And this board, which was a different board last year,
was pummeled by the community for
removing social emotional learning from curriculum, for prioritizing the
mental health of our students, and this particular person in this role is a
social worker. We've also ref'd two other social
workers. So the priority of mental health seems to be
declining for this district, and
that's really concerning to me.
I guess I just don't understand why we wouldn't try to bring back somebody
under the strategist role
who we know is making a really positive impact in our
community.
Sure. And if the board is charging the administrative team to go back
and
revise the budget again,
I don't think we're going to do that this evening, but that's certainly within
the board's purview of an action you can take to sort of say to the admin-
I think I would like to discuss that as a board.
I don't understand
why we're not-
So perhaps I'll step aside-
Trying to switch that
... and let you move into-
Well
... meeting decisions and discussion.
We're not there yet.
Okay. Yeah.
Sorry.
Sorry about the forms.
Yeah.
That's all right.
Sorry. And I'll
say it again, I said this last week, we don't really have any
real cuts from the director roles.
We have a shifting of responsibilities.
I don't know how this board feels about that.
But, I've
talked to quite a few board chairs in the community who've gone
through financial crises in other
municipalities, and one of the first things they said to me was, "Have
you
reduced your building administrators?"
I know that that's personal, and I'm not trying to make it
personal, but we do have four building administrators at the high school, we only
have three at the middle school. We are shifting responsibilities
from special ed director role over to an instructional strategist role.
The same with DEI. There really has not been a
reduction. There's been no
solution for solving redundancies
in this budget for me.
And
I have a problem with that.
And again, I feel like you might be moving into board discussions, so I'm happy
to answer any questions before you deliberate.
Thank you. Member Feller.
Yeah.
So to Member Richardson's point, I am pretty worried
about the special education classrooms.
Multiple people have talked about safety being an issue.
And I can actually tell a funny anecdote.
So I visit all the elementary schools, and they were great visits.
And I was meeting with a principal of one of the elementary schools, just in
her office, and she had a radio on her and also
track shoes, and I was kind of confused, like, "Why are you wearing running shoes?"
And it was because on occasion, multiple times a day,
she'll get a call on her radio and have to
run to one of the life skill rooms because they're so
short-staffed. And I couldn't believe that.
I thought the role of a principal was something different than that, at least.
So,
it might just not be possible
to stay under 6%-
Yeah
... and staff special education rooms appropriately. It just might not be possible.
We could go to the city council and say, "Guys, we tried really hard,
and we just can't do it."
Mm-hmm.
So
to the superintendent, assistant superintendent,
are there concerns about safety in these special
education classrooms, and do we just need to break that
magical 6% threshold to do special education
appropriately?
I'll let the superintendent.
Do you want to take that one?
I think that Joe would have a better sense of this, but I
do understand special education pretty well.
I have visited those same places that you've visited.
I think
there's a level of
need of students that we have. We have a large
population to begin with.
So I think safety has always got to be
a concern.
I don't hear from the
leaders in the schools that they are particularly
worried about that,
or that they feel that there are more resources that are needed.
I think that the training that is being offered is important,
and I think there's now a fairly good incentive
for teachers to want to be trained.
So
that's not something that has risen
or been risen for me to take a look at as something
that is
in deficit.
Please.
Thank you. Other
questions for
either Joe or Abigail or superintendent?
I have a question.
Yes, Member Feller.
Superintendent Entwistle,
so we voted as a board to advance reconfiguration one week
ago. Can you just give us an update on how
that planning process is evolving in the past week?
Just give us an update.
Well, I think right now,
Joe is very involved with doing some
listening sessions at the elementary schools, and
those include staff and parents. So it's
really
an opportunity to
get the experts, the people who are going to be engaged, and the parents who are
already engaged with these kids, and
just spend some time listening. So, that's
what's been happening this week. I think it's going to continue for another
week or so.
Great.
Other questions?
I had one question
that was about the funding coming through
for
the first amount coming through from the state that was income-based, and the
second housing-based. Are there any restrictions on
how that money then gets used, given that it's coming
through
from
those needs, and do we have some requirements on how we
then expend that money?
What I understand about those dollars right now is that those would come
through our state subsidy,
in which case there is not restrictions on how they are used.
If that is incorrect, and they are directed through a grant, like we have a
McKinney-Vento homeless prevention grant, if they are restricted
or delivered through a restricted venue, then I
would anticipate that we might face some.
Again, unfortunately, we just don't have the detail on those
dollars yet, but certainly you're right to think that
any restrictions would impact what we've put up here.
And I guess my follow-up question is,
given that that's how that money comes through,
I guess first, do we have some needs in those areas, and do we
feel some responsibility to expend that
money in that way, in those areas?
Sure. I think we
are always planning to support students.
And again, I think trying to reintroduce
teacher-facing positions that are directly working with students
is part of the rationale here.
Thank you.
Other questions?
If there are none, we will move to public comment.
And,
I will
read public comment. The board's public comment is an opportunity for the
board... Yeah, just a minute. I got to read this one.
I got it.
Yeah. The board's public comment time is an opportunity for the board
to listen to opinions of the public
that relate to school and education matters on or off this evening's agenda.
The board is here to listen.
Anyone wishing to speak will be asked to proceed to the microphone and state your
name
and the town or city where you reside.
All questions will be recorded by the superintendent and/or chair,
and there's a couple other people who are offering to help us with that, so I
appreciate it, and will be answered at the end of public comment to the extent
possible. If answers are not available, someone will be
assigned
to reply to you as soon as the answer is available.
You'll be given three minutes to speak.
There will be no interaction between the public and board members.
Additionally,
we would ask that there's no clapping, booing, or other interruptive
behavior.
As a reminder, board meetings are broadcast live, recorded, and posted
on the city's website. So please consider the impact
of your comments. And I have Member Risch.
I have a motion related to public comment tonight.
This will be the fourth time the motion to pass the superintendent's budget has
been in action for the school board.
Throughout the budget process, there's been approximately 20 hours of public
testimony related to the budget.
We have missed the first of two mandatory presentation dates to the
city council. We have the final opportunity Tuesday, April
14th. That's next week.
Recognizing the effort that everyone has put into this process, including the
public, for the sake of efficiency and humanity,
I move that we adjust tonight's public comment as follows:
Each individual will have no more than three minutes.
Ceding of time will not be allowed tonight.
Each of the two public comment sections will be limited to
no more than 75 minutes per session.
Those who have not commented yet should be allowed to go to the front of the
line.
And this is not a limit or a
stunt of public comment, but rather to
more efficiently
make use of the time we have while ensuring we're all at home at a
decent hour.
Everyone is requested to model the rules of decorum while speaking and
listening at all times in the chamber. And that's my motion.
Thank you. So, I have a motion on the floor to limit public
comment to 75 minutes each time,
requesting that people who are making comments for the
first time come first, and people be given three
minutes of time with no conceding of time, so no yielding of
time.
Do I have a second?
I have a second from Member Feller.
Member Risch, do you have anything else to add to that?
This motion is a product of some discussions, and I
think it's best that we get to our budget vote tonight.
And I appreciate everyone's help and commentary, and
that's what I have.
Thank you. Member Feller.
I'll just say that everyone on this board reads every email that we get.
If you have emailed me, you know that I respond to every single email.
I think this might seem a little bit draconian, but I really hope
people realize, we met for two hours last night.
We're meeting for two hours tomorrow night. This is a full-time job.
I'm about to lose my full-time job. I'm just kidding.
I'm not going to actually lose my full-time job, but it's been more than 40 hours a
week. So I think that's my rationale for supporting this.
Other comments?
I mean, no, not really. It's been said.
Okay.
Seeing none. All those in favor of this motion?
I'm opposed.
And opposed? It's unanimous.
That's unanimous. So,
people will be limited to three minutes with no yielding
of time, and
we will have 75 minutes, so it will go...
We have until 8:30.
Is that right?
No. More. Yeah.
Yeah. No, I'm sorry. Yeah.
No, that's right.
That's correct.
8:30.
8:30. Okay.
No later than 8:00.
No later than 8:30, yes.
So first public comment, go ahead.
Thank you. Elizabeth Fowler, 18B Street, South
Portland.
Here as a parent and a community member, and a former employee of the
district.
I have, as a former employee, participated in a lot of the
diversity, equity, and inclusion work prior
to leaving the district.
And I understand that work to be hard
and exhausting, and at times unrewarding work.
And you all are engaged in that, and thank you for that.
Thank you for your hard work.
I want you to know that many of us in the community appreciate the work that you're
doing here.
There are two basic things that you start with when you do
equity work. One is checking your biases.
What assumptions do you make about other people?
And in your situation, I think you have to think about,
who are the people who are best positioned to provide you with
broad insight into what the needs
of the community, the large community of South Portland are.
And that is your school-based team, your administrative
team. The second
thing you're asked to
do is check your privilege. What rights and privileges and
freedoms do I enjoy that others may not?
And that leads you to ask, what do I want for my children, right?
And should I want the same thing for everyone else's children?
And that requires us to put aside some of the niche, maybe
privileges that we would like to enjoy, but that aren't
realistic necessarily for everybody to enjoy.
So
I think the question that you have is how do we get what we want for
the most children, most students in the district, given
the fiscal restraints that we have?
So thank you for doing the work.
Thank you for considering your biases and the biases of our community,
and thank you for considering privilege.
We're lucky to live here.
Thank you very much.
Again, thank you.
Hello, I'm Andy Luberschane from Goudy Street here in South
Portland. I've written a number of emails to the board,
including one recently after the last board meeting that I'm here to say
I'm not particularly proud of. It was written in anger.
It was somewhat mean-spirited to a few of you, and I just want
to start by apologizing for that. There's no need to be mean in those
communications. However, I am angry and
I'm still angry, and a lot of parents are.
I think you'll hear from other commenters.
We're angry that the administration and some members
of the board
seem to have taken advantage of a moment of weakness for the community.
This moment of financial crisis for the district
to push through an agenda, which is at the very least very
controversial, and in my experience, unpopular.
Which is missing, by the way, lots of crucial details still to this day, which
we're not hearing. There's a huge difference, for example, in reconfiguration
between randomly selecting kids from all across the district
and putting them in schools at random, which would be the way to increase diversity
the most in,
I don't know the impact on equity, but certainly diversity.
And mixing up the schools that are closer to each other,
for example. But we don't even have that very basic detail, which makes a
huge difference to the lives of parents and kids.
We're also angry that this was initially billed, reconfiguration was
billed as budget savings in one of those initial meetings.
It then has, over time, drifted to becoming proposed as budget
neutral when it seems like it became convenient to do so to
avoid city council oversight.
And now appears to be costing more money, but we can't say how much money
because we haven't done the work to actually assess how much it's going to cost
over the summer for teachers to make new decisions.
In pushing this agenda, it feels like the board has been distracted
from actually solving our budget problem...
missing out on a chance to work with the whole community on solutions for
our district, and actually finding ways of stretching our budget as much as
possible in this moment of crisis to help the most disadvantaged
kids.
I'm also angry, frankly, that several members of the board didn't bother to really
justify publicly in this forum, why they voted for
reconfiguration or even exactly what they thought they were voting for.
Again-
30 seconds left
... there's huge difference in how this could be done, and it's not clear to any
members of the community what the board actually, what many members of the board
think reconfiguration means. That would make a huge difference for a lot of
us.
So again, I'm here to say it's not too late to change course.
We all make mistakes. I have in some of my emails to some of you, and
again, apologize for that. We all let emotion get the better of us
sometimes.
But if just two of you school board members-
Three minutes
... reconsider-
Thanks
... we'd really appreciate it. Thank you.
Thank you, Andy.
Hi, I'm Cass Soza. I'm a Keller first and second grade
parent and PTA president.
I said yesterday on three separate phone calls, some with other parents,
one with a board member, and multiple staff in our district, that I support
reconfiguration or redistricting.
There's been talk about petitioning the closure of Keller from other school
parents, and as a parent of Keller, our kids already know they're going somewhere
else.
And so I think it just takes the focus on what's going to happen down the line.
So, my questions are for administration.
How are we planning to draw city lines to know where our students are
going?
And if parents have multiple children in
two different locations, is there consideration for start and end time to be
different for those who are not bused?
So I'll end with this. I urge central office to share rubrics of what
reconfiguration or redistricting in South Portland looks like, so
that the board can make decisions based on facts and not blindly
committing to something that they don't know the future and plans for our students
and staff.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Hi, my name is Aidan Renahan. I'm a parent of a Brown School kindergartner and a
future kindergartner. I live at Stanley Street. I'm really sorry.
Can you just say your name again? You have to pull that closer. Yeah. Yeah.
My name is Aidan Renahan. I live on- Thank you ... Stanley Street.
I'm parent of a Brown School kindergartner and a future kindergartner somewhere.
Really quickly, I think the community would love to know where Board Member Dowling
is, and an explanation for what the board plans to do for the vice chair position.
I also want to say on behalf of the community, I totally respect you want to limit
your time and limit public comment, but then I think we would ask as a community
that board members better engage by email, real discussion by email,
real phone calls, not, "Thank you, I hear you," or, "I'm ignoring you." If that's
what you prefer and you want to manage your time that way, totally reasonable, but
then you owe us some time. This is our moment for explanation from the
board, and if you want to do it another way, you owe explanation another way.
Really quickly, I want to talk about budget issues.
So I laud the board that they've built a $200,000 fund balance in our new budget.
But I'm also very frustrated that we are being told over and over again,
reconfiguration is not a budget issue. It is a budget issue.
That's such a pejorative comment. I want to point something out.
We are entering into this process with no firm budget and no firm plan.
A parent in our organizing group did a study of 15 peer school districts
that went about reconfiguration, and those districts all overspent their
transportation budget by 20%. Okay?
20% of just salaries and gasoline in
our transportation budget is half a million dollars.
So we are going from a $200,000 fund balance to
$250,000, $300... No, I can't do math.
Three minutes is too short. That's one line item.
We're not talking about capital. We're not talking about staffing.
We're not talking about moving. Look at what has happened through this process.
In the beginning, we were told, "This is a budget neutral item.
We don't need any additional planning time or compensation time." Oh, all of a
sudden, we need four half days. Nope, not going to work.
Now we need shortened school years. We're losing instructor time.
Nope, not going to work. Now we have a fund balance, and what is the district
proposing? $200,000 for planning that we didn't need a week
ago. We've increased the cost by $200,000.
We've been at this a week, okay? Parents are not
against reconfiguration. Parents are against reconfiguration without a
plan. A plan that includes the community, a plan that has
discussions, and a plan that is a firm budget.
I sit here and I listen to the district saying, "We are fine.
This budget will work for us." This is the district that has blown
through a $3 million fund balance in the last three years.
We cannot do this ready, aim, fire process-
30 seconds left
... by completely changing how we deliver elementary school education without a
real plan. Give us a plan. For community members, if you would like to
support getting a real plan, we have made signs that say, "Save our neighborhood
schools." Come find us. Please demand a plan from the district.
Just a plan. Not a change, just a plan.
Thank you, Aidan.
My name is Ali Aldaman.
From Evans Street. I have two children at Dyer.
Chair and members of the board, I am here tonight to inform you that I have filed
affidavit with the city clerk under South Portland City Charter
1013 to recall Board Chair Rosemary DeAngelis.
The reasons are the same ones dozens of parents have stated every
workshop. The continued push for grade level configuration this
year without a plan, completely ignoring the nearly
unanimous opposition from nearly every parent who has spoken.
The board is overriding families, disrupting young children with
unnecessary transitions in busing, and prioritizing
demographic balancing over educational stability and community
schools.
All of this while decimating our educational staff and closing one of our
community schools. This is not leadership.
It is ignoring the very people you were elected to serve.
I have the signed affidavit and petition sheets with me,
and am happy to provide copies to any registered voter who would like to
assist in collecting signatures.
The recall process is now underway, and parents across South Portland are
mobilizing because the board has shown it will not listen to
us in these meetings. I urge the rest of the board to
reconsider the reconfiguration before the April
14th city council presentation. The public is
watching, and you'll be held accountable at the ballot box and through the
charter process.
Anybody who does need petition signatures, I'm up in the back about
halfway through. Not to sign right now, but to collect
paperwork. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Ellie.
Hello, my name is Sierra Bowler, and I'm a resident of South Portland.
I just have a few questions for you.
Where in the budget are the dollars that support the people side of the change,
not just moving furniture, but helping the students, staff, and
families transition well?
Given the tight timeline and the district's recent
budget challenges, what concrete checkpoints will the board
have in place between now and August to ensure
reconfiguration remains the best choice?
And how will early warning signs, whether it's cracks in the
implementation plan or unexpected costs, be
addressed before the momentum alone carries the district
too far?
Thank you very much.
Good evening.
Sarah Gay, parent, educator,
resident, and president of the South Portland Teachers Association.
I promise I'm wearing red on the inside.
I didn't get home this afternoon.
First off, I am really struggling with the board's message that they
value stakeholder input with this vote to limit stakeholder
input.
Come on.
I'd like to start with a couple of clarifications.
Roughly half of the member concerns that I receive in my role as teachers
union president relate to special education staffing, safety, support,
and the impact of insufficient resources on the learning and
safety of the children in their care, but also the health, well-being, and
ultimately career viability of the staff in their room.
This is something that has absolutely been reported, and we have
attempted to address many issues over many years and have made
very little headway. I'm glad we're talking about this now.
So Abby, behind me, I'm stealing her thunder, is a math teacher, is absolutely
spectacular, and explains math to me in a way I can understand. No small feat.
So referencing an average teacher salary of about $69,000
to calculate an hourly rate, which is about $54 an hour, that
$15,000 budgeted is equivalent to one teacher
spending 277 hours of time,
don't want to be that teacher,
or about 55 hours for five people, or about 28 hours
for 10 people, or
a little over five hours each for 50 people, just to give a sense of the scale of
that dollar amount.
I'd like to speak on behalf of my elementary colleagues, many of whom are in their
classrooms or hopefully have left their classrooms this evening after
caregiver-teacher conferences.
All of the meetings that have taken place in the last two weeks have fundamentally
excluded a number of stakeholders who are not able to be present
because they are doing their jobs at their schools, helping our families learn
about the amazing things their kids are doing.
Many of those teachers have also noted that many of their conferences have been
consumed by worry, question, and
discussion, even if it's just emotional venting about these issues that we are
facing. So I would like to ask for you to please be mindful of
scheduling in every way we possibly can, understanding the restrictions of our
timeline, but perhaps also considering that as part of our timeline.
We sent out a survey last night, and I have to say,
teachers are really big nerds, because I put this survey out at 9:00 and had over
90 respondents-
30 seconds
... by 10:00.
So 348 members are in the South Portland
Teachers Association bargaining group, 290 are
SPTA members. That is 83% representation, which is very high for our
region.
92% currently have a negative or very negative perception of staff
morale in the district.
Our members identified two specific advocacy priorities that we are going to take
forward, which is to advocate for appropriate, timely, and thorough elementary
transition plans, and appropriate processes-
Minute's over
... for teacher movement transfers and recall to ensure staff are placed
appropriately for the next year.
Thank you, Sarah.
Abby Anderson, SPTA VP.
Continuing with our survey results, we have some transition-related
data. So an estimate
of the time needed to move to a new room or building was three days or more for
45% of elementary school staff. A similar percentage
said that they needed a minimum of three days to meet with new colleagues and teams
in order to feel prepared at the start of the school year.
A slightly higher percentage than the 45 say they needed a minimum of three
days to prepare to teach in a new grade or role.
However, many other comments cite significantly greater time needs,
specifically from staff who are being involuntarily
transferred.
We had
51.1% of elementary respondents support reconfiguration.
However--
Sorry, 50% of five to 12 respondents supported reconfiguration with a
slight majority preferring a longer timeline.For overall
dispositions, 84% still agreed or strongly agreed with the
statement, quote, "There should be more cuts to higher level administration in the
budget rather than so many cuts to lower paid student facing positions."
74% of respondents disagreed or strongly disagreed that, quote,
"Central office administration have been fully transparent with staff about budget
process, including how we got here and why their proposals are good for
students." Our executive board shares these serious concerns that life
disrupting decisions have not been made through a transparent or credible
process, and we welcome further data to thoroughly justify all proposed
changes.
75% of surveyed staff believe the school board should ask the city council to
increase the amount it will approve in school funding for school year '27.
76% support the superintendent's proposed budget
in its current form.
I think that's opposed. Opposed, sorry.
That is opposed.
That it's opposed. 76% opposed.
180 members of our unit participated
in this survey, which is still open, and we can share our full results next week
because it will close on Sunday. We do have to note that it's a significant amount
of this data was collected prior to the release of tonight's slides.
So we can't share the exact number due to rapidly ongoing participation.
I would like to ask for each board member's response to Sarah's questions from two
meetings ago. Should the board's goal-
30 seconds.
Thank you. ... be to ensure the best possible education for every student with
the resources we have or is quote, "Adequate good enough?"
Also, I just would like to say, this is no longer results.
The school board stipend and my SPTA stipend are very small.
No one does this for the money. We're in it for the community.
But we do need a dialogue. And what you get via email and via public comments and
public meetings is monologues. So there's been little dialoguing with the public
and with staff about what's going to happen for students and educators.
And that's what everyone here is begging for.
So to reduce the monologuing, we need-
30 minutes, Abby
... more dialoguing to pull off our reconfiguration plans. Thank you.
Thank you, Abby.
Hello, my name is Andrew Gigler. I'm an educational technician in a functional life
skills special education classroom at Dyer Elementary.
I'm speaking today about staffing and safety concerns.
Due to multiple resignations of ed techs throughout the school year, our classroom
has been short-staffed by one to two ed techs for nearly the entire school
year. We have an upcoming resignation next week, which means we will
only have been fully staffed for about six weeks of the entire school year,
unless a new ed tech is hired.
Throughout the school year, there have been many days in which we were not provided
with a substitute ed tech to fill a vacant position.
My coworkers
in our room and I have not received additional pay for
collectively doing the work of vacant positions on days we did not
receive substitutes for these positions.
To be clear, we have been doing the work for roles that would have been paid
otherwise. The school administration should be aware of this issue.
There has never been an explanation made to me about why
we are not being compensated for doing the work of a vacant position or
where that money is going, and I'm asking for an explanation.
These funds exist. They would have been used to pay staff for the
entire school year,
had there not been any resignations.
Due to our classroom being short-staffed for nearly the entire school year, our
classroom has had numerous safety concerns.
All of our students have been affected and aren't given as much support or time
as they otherwise would have had to work on their individual learning goals.
I'm very concerned about the future staffing levels in South Portland School
Department for next school year. The current plan to lay off every ed tech one,
the two OTs embedded in functional life skills rooms, and countless other
staff.
These staff members make our schools more welcoming, inclusive, and safe.
It has already been a massive challenge to maintain adequate staffing
and functional life skills classrooms, and the response is to lay off
the occupational therapists that are integrated into these classrooms.
These staff members are simply irreplaceable.
They provide exceptional, essential, highly skilled, and individualized
support to some of the most vulnerable students in the entire school department.
I would like to know what the plan is for replacing these staff members.
With the impending vacancy in our room, the plan to lay off
two of these OTs and the two new positions proposed
that would immediately require five new ed techs that we already know that need to
be-
30 seconds left
... need to be hired for next school year.
Based on the conditions in these rooms, I'd be personally shocked if all
of the ed techs that have already not resigned
plan to stay for next school year. So I would guess the
district would have to hire easily more than five ed
techs. I guarantee five,
I would guess much more than that. So I'm asking for the plan.
Are you going to hire ed techs that don't have the same training experience as
these OTs? And to cap it off, overall,
I feel like the needs and safety-
30 minutes
... of all students in the district is not being prioritized, especially in our
FLS rooms. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Andrew.
Hi, Jennifer Christensen. I'm a parent. That's heavy.
I have a kid with special needs who graduated from South Portland schools, and
the classroom he was in every single year is nothing like what he described.
I'm so thankful.
In any event, I just really quickly, my daughter had to pick
me up from the last school board meeting. I didn't have a car.
When I got into the car, we had a weird juxtaposition of parent and
child because she immediately knew something was wrong and asked me
what was wrong and if I wanted to talk about it.
I told her that the meeting had gotten rather heated, and a few people made some
comments that were mean and really out of line.
She said, "Oh, what did you do?"
I think more than a couple of people in this room know I don't typically shy away
from a confrontation if I feel it's warranted.
But that's why I was sad, because I didn't do anything.
But neither did anybody else, either in the audience or up on
stage. In fact, some people cheeredI don't
think anybody in this room is happy about anything going on in
this room.
And I'm not here to defend what's happening to our school district, but I don't
believe that any of the people on this stage who have given their time and energy
to the board when nobody else, literally nobody else in the city
would, and Rosemary took the brunt of it, nobody
deserved any of what happened last time.
If we were talking about children, if that had been children that were speaking,
none of us would have tolerated behavior like that.
So I just wanted to say to all of you on the stage, and especially to my daughter,
that I'm really sorry I didn't speak up when things got ugly.
Thank you, Jennifer.
Hi,
my name is Lynn McEwen. I am a parent and a teacher in South Portland,
and here I do my speed read. As a teacher, you are often humbled by the old
adage, practice what you preach. I so often tell my students that all
feelings are welcome, and you are capable of being
respectful even when you're having big feelings.
I also try to normalize mistakes as best I can and encourage students to repair
with others when mistakes happen.
So a quick personal anecdote is about a week ago, I joined a
conversation with some fellow stakeholders, people who I respect immensely,
and I steamrolled the conversation. I was overly activated.
I wasn't a good listener. I recognized my mistake afterward and did my
best to repair the harm. I say all this to remind everyone that as we
navigate this upheaval, we will all make mistakes.
We will feel deeply, and that is okay.
We also need to commit as a community to being respectful and
repairing when we make mistakes.
Also, please don't forget that kids are watching how we handle this,
literally in the moment, watching online or in the audience tonight,
and as we carry out these changes.
I also want to speak about the work we did on the Boundaries and Configuration
Subcommittee, because I think there are some misconceptions about that process.
The committee began in winter of 2023.
We compiled extensive research on the achievement gap, school integration, and
district data across demographics,
socioeconomic status. Over time,
our community actually came together on this topic.
And in the winter of 2024, while some wanted the process to
go faster and some wanted it to go slower,
we recommended some short-term solutions and some long-term
solutions for
exploration, including reconfiguration, controlled choice, and magnet
programming. Last year's budget became the focal point, and
the momentum for that
work was lost, and many of us who invested deeply in that dialogue feel like
we're watching this issue resurface without the benefit of that
knowledge. So all source material is on
spsdme.org/page/bc, and
you're also welcome to look me up, Lynn McEwen, on the staff directory, and
I'm happy to share the literature review that we conducted.
And I know that it was linked on some slides a couple weeks back.
The research I want to highlight most is John Hattie's work, a
synthesis of over 1,000 meta-analyses covering hundreds of millions
of students. Two findings are directly relevant here.
School transitions-
30 seconds
... do carry a negative effect size.
Moving from one school to another actively sets students back.
But socioeconomic integration carries a meaningful positive effect size,
particularly for low-income students.
The long-term benefit of attending a more integrated school
significantly outweighs the short-term disruption of transition,
if that transition is well supported.
The harm of transition is real, but time-limited.
The benefit of integration compounds over years.
I just want to highlight one last thing.
That's three minutes.
Darn it.
Go ahead. Keep going. Just-
Okay, we'll soar through it.
No, just-
I do not know what it is like to decide-
No, no. I meant just finish the sentence.
Okay. I don't know what it's like to make such hard decisions,
but I know that hard decisions are never black and white.
There's always gray, and so thank you for working through those hard decisions
and thinking critically, and doing the best you can.
Thank you.
Thank you, Lynn.
Good evening.
My name's Emily Haynes. I'm a resident and a parent. I'll start with my questions.
In your current plans for the district, how will you decide what students will
attend which schools? What costs will you incur due to increased busing
across the district? How will you manage start and stop times at each school?
How will you address families with multiple children at multiple locations?
Will you cohort students once placed in a school?
What will before and aftercare look like for each school?
Will there be a limit to how long we allow a student to sit on a bus each day?
Who will supervise the students on these bus routes?
How will you ensure outcomes for all students will be positive, including high,
middle, and lower achieving students?
How will you manage special ed, multilingual students, and students with
504 plans and their transitions from one school to the next without disruption?
How will you manage preparing students for
major school transitions, both this year and in each year they transition to a new
school in the future? How are you going to provide emotional and mental health
support to students who have been separated from their known school community,
friends, and siblings? Oh, I just lost my
spot.Oh, sorry.
How do you plan to adequately pay teachers and allow for the time
needed over the summer to move classrooms and set up new schools to train entirely
new teams of teachers in time for an August start to this coming school year,
especially if this is optional work?
I also hope that by now the school board is realizing that the vote to pursue
reconfiguration for this August, while good intentioned, was
premature. It is abundantly clear that the district administration cannot pull
this off in mere months. Starting listening sessions now?
Please. Parents need to know logistics yesterday so
that we can plan our work and childcare plans in place for August.
Put them in place. We have to do it. Students need to know where they will be
headed next year so that their parents, teachers, and current school communities
can prepare them for a major transition.
This includes having closure at their current schools, tours at their new school to
make the transition less scary, making connections with new staff they will
encounter. Staff need to know now what is happening for their
futures. They need to know that they will be fairly compensated for the
amount of work required to pack up a current learning space and set up a new
classroom that is welcoming, organized, and engaging, or to
prepare for teaching an entirely new grade.
These things do not happen in one or two teacher PD days.
A $250 stipend is not even a day's pay for most
teachers. Think about that. Moving a classroom takes
time. I am a teacher. I know.
30 seconds.
If you can't answer these questions tonight... Oh, one more.
Special educators and families of students with IEPs or 504s need to know that
their legally binding plans will be in place for August.
If you can't answer these questions now, you should not be moving forward with your
current plans. I hope that you realize it's not too late to reverse course on
reconfiguration. Please consider putting forth a motion to vote for a pause
for this August. Slow down the process. Go back to the drawing board.
Use the recommendations from the 2024 panel to dive deep into the steps-
Three minutes
... to do this right. Focus on getting this budget right first.
Rebuild trust. Rebuild community. It's the right thing to do.
Thank you, Emily.
Good evening. Glen Stoler, South Portland, parent of two amazing boys, three and
five years old. I want to start by commending you and all the others
that are involved in this process, including the administration, associations, and
parents. I can't imagine how much dedication and time it takes to
get this right. I literally feel like I'm falling behind in my life just to be
here tonight.
I'm late to this party. Part of that's my fault.
I put my trust in you and naively assumed that these budget meetings are just
focused on passing a budget that's as fair and balanced as possible, and
wouldn't include an overhaul of our elementary schools.
So when I heard that was happening, I went back and listened to nearly 20 hours of
these recordings of the past meetings, and what I saw was alarming.
I saw a budget crisis that resulted in the loss of dozens of
educators intentionally overshadowed by votes to close and
reconfigure our elementary schools.
I saw a group of elected officials making hasty decisions without a
clear idea of how they'll be implemented, how much they'll save, or
more likely, cost, or how they'll meet the stated equity
objectives.
I saw you dismiss real concerns over the safety of our littlest children
while asking us to prioritize our tax dollars to renovate a police station.
To be clear, I think our officers deserve adequate facilities.
I just found it odd for the school board to be advocating for them over our
students and our teachers.
I saw many brave parents, teachers, and community members asking thoughtful
questions, only to have you selectively answer the easy ones
while ignoring the vast majority of the rest.
I saw you ask the public to not cheer or boo during public comment, but
subtly show your own favoritism towards those who support you and speak
out against those who don't.
I admit that before this meeting, I had to Google what the role of a school board
is, and what stuck out to me was the expectation to represent
community interests and hold district leadership accountable, ensuring
high quality education for students.
I don't see how we can say that we're meeting that requirement when it appears that
you're not listening to community feedback, not getting the right level of
information before supporting changes proposed by district leadership,
and chose not to answer the easy question from the public about what standard
of education are we striving for.
I heard tonight a couple of questions from the board related to reconfiguration
costs and what actions have transpired since the vote.
What I didn't hear were real answers.
Maybe it's not too late to course-correct.
I urge you to self-reflect and reconsider the decisions that have been made to
close the school and reconfigure without having a well-baked-
That's 30 seconds left
... plan based on data and community input.
Let me be clear, my words are not intended to be personal attacks, and I hope
we don't conflate criticism with being unkind.
This is just my opinion on how badly this process has gone.
Thank you for letting me speak.
Thank you very much, Glen.
Good evening. I want to thank the members of the school board for your time,
your service, and your willingness to take on-
I'm sorry. Can you introduce yourself?
Oh, sorry. My name's Kate Hurd. Uh-
Thank you.
Yes. I want to thank the members of the school board for your time, your service,
and your willingness to take on such a difficult set of decisions.
I also want to acknowledge something at the outset.
While many of the voices here tonight may be opposed to redistricting,
that is often the nature of public decisions like this.
Those most concerned show up as they should, but there is also
a quieter majority in this community who understand that
change is necessary, even if they are not here to say so.
Decisions like these are never easy, but I believe this is not simply
about closing a school. It is about creating a more equitable and
sustainable system for all students.For too long,
along with the brewing fiscal crisis, we have had multiple
imbalances across the district, imbalances in enrollment,
in resources, and in opportunity.
Redistricting is not just a logistical exercise, it
is a mechanism to correct those disparities.
It is how we ensure that no school is overburdened while another is
underutilized, and that every child has access to a learning environment that
is appropriately resourced and supported.
I spoke before about how my children attend two different schools and
have access to different resources and opportunities.
Still, what is even more challenging is the shift in positions we've seen.
Some who now argue against these changes were previously supportive
of closing Kayler when they believed the impact would be limited to
Kayler students and families. There were calls not to rush,
yet continued support for closure.
That inconsistency highlights why leadership is so
critical in moments like these. The reality is that something had to
be done. The financial situation is untenable.
So I want to again commend the board for making a difficult but necessary
decision.
Now, the work ahead is what matters most.
Redistricting gives us the opportunity to do this right, to create
balanced schools, to distribute resources more fairly, and to
ensure that every student, regardless of where they live, has
access to the same level of opportunity.
Let's also recognize the diversity of this district as one of our greatest
strengths.
30 seconds left.
When students learn in more integrated, balanced environments, as
someone mentioned earlier with data, the benefits extend to
everyone academically, socially, and culturally. Thank you.
Thank you, Kate.
Hi, my name is Cass. I go
to Small School,
and I just don't think it's fair that teachers and kids
have to be in this
pressure.
Can I reset the time? Thank you. Meredith Diamond, parent,
community member.
I'm sorry. Could you say your name again?
A little-
Meredith Diamond
... lower. Mary?
Diamond.
Thank you.
Yep.
So we started tonight's meeting revisiting board norms, and I
would like to add one to our list, and the one I'd like to add is a
commitment to transparency and civic responsibility.
Tonight, in reference to the cost of reconfiguration, we have heard the following,
quote, "We aren't prepared to present on reconfiguration cost
tonight."
Quote, "We don't know who has to move."
My translation of this is that we actually have no idea how much
reconfiguration is going to cost us.
Tonight, we've also heard about the protections
that are in place to keep districts from going off the rails
financially. We've heard about restrictions on cost center transfers.
We've heard about votes required to exceed the limits of those
across cost center transfers.
But I recently read the FY25 audit presented to the city, and
it's really hard to reconcile the findings of that audit,
a report which, for the record, is required to be delivered to this board
by the auditor with a deadline of December 30, 2025.
Facts from the FY25 audit that are relevant, in FY24 and '25,
our district overspent by
$2,370,000
without approval, without authorization.
They just spent the money.
In FY25, $400,000 in grant funds were left
on the table because we didn't ask for reimbursement in time.
They had to come out of the general fund.
In June of 2025, we had to write a check to the state of Maine for
$123,000 because of grant
expenditures that were overstated by the district and then over
reimbursed.
Failure to do that would have jeopardized future grant funding.
Another $35,000 in grants were over expended and not reimbursed,
and had to come out of the general fund.
$600,000 in benefit costs were under withdrawn,
under withheld from employees. That had to be absorbed.
30 seconds left.
The errors are diverse and consistent.
Even on the slide deck on the website, seven questions about line increases are
attributed to improper coding in FY26.
We heard it from Dr. Prince herself, now is not a time for
increased risk. Now is definitely not the time for the massive financial gamble
that reconfiguration will require of us.
The cost our kids are having to pay is too high already.
Thank you.
Thank you, Meredith.
Hi. Good evening. My name is Kate Normandin, South Portland
resident, two kids at Skillen, and the Skillen School PTA
president.
I want to begin by just thanking you, the board, the district.
You are not making easy decisions, and your efforts don't go
unnoticed, so thank you.
I am back again to talk about reconfiguration.
But I want to be clear, I support reconfiguration.
What I'm about to say is not opposition.
It is concern from someone who wants this to succeed.
So we have a date, September,
five months from now.
As far as I can tell, there's no implementation plan
behind that date, but I am looking forward to the listening sessions.
Maybe we will learn more.
But I have one example of a downstream impact that maybe has
not been considered, and it's one that I know best.
Each school's PTA is an independent organization
with its own bylaws, own elected board, own bank accounts,
and our own nonprofit status
Reconfiguration most likely means that we are going to need
to rebuild from the ground up these organizations.
New bylaws, new finances reconciled, new filings made.
That's months of cross-school coordination and
legal work that has to be carried out by parents who already have full-time
jobs and kids at home.
And I know about all this because it's my side job, a side job I very, very
much love, but I cannot imagine doing it in five months on top
of everything else the transition demands.
This matters because PTAs are not a nice-to-have.
We fund what the budget won't cover.
We create traditions and events that give a school its
identity. We show up for teachers, students, staff,
and families. If we walk into September without a
functioning PTA infrastructure, we lose more than
fundraising. We lose the community fabric that helps students feel
at home in a new building, and that cost hasn't been
accounted for.
But the PTAs really, they're just one thread.
Pull on transportation, IEP transitions, before and
aftercare, building readiness. Each one of those threads
leads somewhere, and I don't think we've pulled on all of them yet.
I am not here to stop reconfiguration.
I'm here because I believe in it. I believe it's what's best for our students.
But a stumbling implementation-
30 seconds left
... will confirm every fear this very passionate community has about whether
the board and the district can be trusted to execute it.
So tonight, I'm asking the board to make a commitment, put reconfiguration
back on the agenda with a commitment for a future implementation
with a clear timeline.
Don't abandon the work, but plan it properly and do it right.
Thank you.
Kate.
Hi, my name is John O'Connor. I'm a resident of South Portland for about 20-some
odd years.
Semi-retired.
I've seen my taxes go from 4,200 to over
$10,000 in five years. I kind of wish the
budget would be 6% less on that part of it, but that
aside, I did have kids go through the school, and the school was really good,
three of them.
I was looking at some of those numbers up there.
My previous life, I used to run a big box store.
I had over 1,500 employees.
Managed
basically over $365 million in sales,
and that was
probably over almost 30 years ago.
You guys are way top-heavy. There's no reason to have as many
salaried people running the school department that you have.
Maybe they do it in every school, but I could tell you five, six people
salary could run all of it. Maybe
like 10
department heads. So I would look at that line item
and try to find some money there. The other thing is
160,000 Portland's paying to have their buses fixed.
Man, they are getting a sweet deal.
That number should be three, four times higher.
So I'd look into that.
About 20 years ago, I redid the Reed School on Granite
Avenue in Scarborough. It was an autistic thing
for children. They had a bunch of little kids in there, and I had to
deal with the bathrooms. And I'll tell you that 40-foot number,
Scarborough code enforcement, it was 40 foot from anywhere in
the classroom, not from the classroom door.
So your bathrooms are going to cost a lot more than you think they're going to
cost. So I'd really look into that to make sure.
I could be wrong. Maybe the rules have changed.
It's been a while, but I did lose a little money on that.
I'm a driver now.
And
you have 21 drivers.
You have two drivers that have already been offered positions in other districts.
You have, out of the 21, at least 10,
I'll say at least eight are really serious about leaving the district.
Probably more like 10. And when you start
ferrying these kids across the district, which you're talking about, you're not
even going to be able to do it with the 21 drivers you have.
30 seconds left.
So you might want to look at a little bit more money in the transportation.
I guess that's it. Thank you, guys.
Thank you, John.
Good evening. My name is Giselle Lopez.
I'm a parent to a sophomore and a fifth grader in the district.
As I've watched these budget presentations, I've been struck time and time again-
Could you speak a little more directly into the mic? Thanks.
Sorry, I'm short. I've been struck time and time again by the fact that there seems
to be a really lack of understanding as to what a budget is supposed to
be. This budget process is an annual requirement, so as
citizens of this city, we have a right to expect that the budget that is presented
for review is as complete as possible so that informed
decisions can be made, and yet this never happens.
This year, with the proposed closure of Cayler, we've been told that it
will yield approximately $2.5 million in savings- ...
but that number is nowhere near accurate since we have not seen any estimates
as to the additional expenses that will be incurred due to the closing of the
school and the need for increased busing.
While it is great
that we have a potential contingency fund for these unknown costs, the
board and the public should have an estimate of all potential costs before voting
on this change.
Relying on a newly created contingency,
just it immediately negates any financial stability that you are looking to put
in place by creating that contingency plan.
I'd also like to know, and I've not been able to find any evidence of this, whether
any other savings were considered before
moving to these proposals. For example,
if overall enrollment numbers have continued to decrease and we
presumably need less staff to teach our children-
Then we should also need less administrative staff to manage the
schools. I would expect that there would be greater savings to be had with
eliminating one of those roles than with eliminating a part-time
percussion position.
We offer, for example, free lunches to all students regardless of need.
Is this something that can be considered and cut back on?
As someone with a child at the middle school, I'd love to know if there was any
consideration made towards eliminating some of these duplicative
costs associated with what is essentially two middle schools in one
building.
What are the potential cost savings to actually run one middle school as we were
promised with one start time and end time, one bus
routes, one principal, one librarian? The list goes on and on.
The middle school is a perfect example of the concern I have about the
proposal to close Kayler, in that it's an idea that was not fully
researched before being implemented, and while it looked great on
paper, in actuality, it has just resulted in increasing costs for
this district.
30 seconds left.
In terms of the reconfiguration, I just want to note that this is not a
budget issue. A budget issue requires actual numbers.
What you have in front of you is an idea, and it's an idea that
arguably many support, but I do think that it needs to be tabled for now, and
sufficient research needs to be made before moving forward.
You should not be voting on a budget with unknown figures of this potential
magnitude. And I want to close on one final point.
When I raised my concerns about this budget with the council, I was told-
It's three minutes
... by our mayor that we should not expect perfection from the school board.
But I just want to make it clear that what we are expecting is competence, and what
we're expecting is a board that actually listens to the
parents, that listens to its staff, and that makes decisions based on a
budget that is well-researched and actually representative of the needs of our
district.
Thank you, Ms.
Fielder.
Hi, my name is Chelsea Kazmierski. I'm a South Portland resident.
I recently learned that special education ed techs in other districts
that deal with significant behaviors work on activities of daily
living, such as toileting, carry out speech or OT
goals
, receive special training through the school district to become
school-based behavioral health providers.
That allows them to bill through Maine Health,
and I think that's something that we are not utilizing in this district
through our special ed techs and something worth looking into.
Thank you, Board Member Feller, for bringing light to what happens in a
school during the day, how principals do need to be on hand to help
out in those special ed classrooms.
I still encourage all of you, if you haven't been in the school or if you
have, go to those classrooms and see what they're like and look for
feedback from those educators.
I was surprised to hear that the superintendent's office did not echo
those concerns about short staffing in our, especially our FLS
classrooms. You've heard earlier tonight that we're looking at another
member leaving. I believe it's this week.
One of our classrooms has an interim teacher at the moment.
And with the proposed cuts,
it was mentioned last week or the week before that one-to-one care would be
looking at two to three students to one educator.
And what that looks like realistically, sometimes it can work and it can work well.
But sometimes if one of those students is dysregulated, what
that can look like, maybe they're swallowing something that's not
food. Maybe they're eloping from the classroom or the building.
Maybe they're having aggressive behaviors.
The person in charge of them is, of course, going to help this dysregulated
student. Other people in the classroom will make sure that the other students they
are working with are safe. But they're not learning during that time.
A dysregulated student is not able to learn.
They need that regulation, which with decreases in staff
and OT, they're not going to be getting.
And then the
teacher that has then stepped in to make sure that those students that are now
not learning are safe, their students aren't learning
either. So while a two to three students to
one educator can work, sometimes it can also
fail a lot more often than it can be successful.
And what it leads to is a lot of kids in that classroom not getting their
specifically designed instruction.
I also have a question about the closure of Kayler and keeping
it, I'm not sure the terminology, shuttered for the next four years,
basically so it can be up and running in case... In case of what?
Are we hoping that we might need that school as a school
again in the next four years with an increase in population?
And if so,
what does that look like if we now have two pre-K
through one schools?
That's three minutes.
I missed the
keep-
And two two through four schools. What does Kayler become?
Is it now pre-K through four?
How does everybody get reconfigured again? Thank you.
Thank you.
Hello. My name is Caleb Collins. I'm president of South
Portland. I live in Stanwood Park.
I also grew up in Stanwood Park, and I went to Dyer.
I now have a first grader and a third grader in Dyer.
And my mother also went to Dyer and lives in Stanwood Park.
I'm about 17 years into my professional career, and I spent the first 10 of
those years as a high school English teacher here in Maine.
This is the first school board meeting that I've been able to attend, and I'd
like to register my concern around how the board has failed to communicate
significant decisions in advance to the community.
I understand we're now in a bit of a predicament.
If closing one of our elementary schools is the best and most logical
option, then I am in support of that.
If closing Dyer were to be the best and most logical option, then I would be in
support of that as well.It seems that closing Kayler is our most
likely path forward. If we're going to close a school with one of our
higher ratios of low socioeconomic student populations,
I see reconfiguration as a necessary step to ensure that we
maintain a degree of equity in our community.
While I have strong connections to Dyer, I identify with my South
Portland community as a whole. Inequity in our schools today
is future inequity in our community.
I'm disheartened with the number of student-facing positions that are being cut.
Our teachers and support staff are an incredible asset, and the
harms we do to them are harms we do to ourselves.
In doing my best to get up to speed on this situation, there's a strong
lack of meaningful information on the cost saved,
structure of implementation, and impact on students that
is owed to the community in order to make and be comfortable with
informed decisions.
I'm glad to see the elementary BCBA and related arts
positions put back in. I would like to better understand why
the added positions, including the two classroom teachers, are
only one-year positions.
Thank you for your service, and thank you for your time.
Thank you very much, Caleb.
Hi, I'm Sarah Brulla, South Portland resident.
I think the board's vote to reconfigure elementary schools was the wrong choice.
It disregards the 2024 Boundaries and Reconfiguration Committee's recommendations.
Throughout this process, questions raised during public comment have not been
recorded or addressed. And most of all, this is a budget process.
The decision to reconfigure elementary schools does not belong in a budget
process.
When board members in this community should have had the time to focus on the major
task of developing a budget in a budget crisis, this topic of
reconfiguration was inserted into the agenda.
It was approved without a sound rationale, with a wildly unreasonable timeline,
and with no plan for how much it will cost or how it will be implemented.
And now you're here to approve a budget that assumes reconfiguration will happen by
August 31st, and you're not even clear what it will cost.
We've been told reconfiguration is budget neutral, and so far tonight we've heard
about costs for paying teachers this summer, costs for moving.
We have not heard about costs for additional busing.
But you're in a position to set this right. Why the rush?
Delay an elementary school reconfiguration until you've taken up the
2024 Elementary Boundaries and Reconfiguration Steering Committee report and
actually followed through on the recommendations, and have meaningfully
involved the community and have developed a detailed and realistic
implementation plan and budget and timeline.
Thank you, Sarah.
Hello, I'm Vladimir Korshin. I'm from Parent At Small School.
I have questions about the listening sessions that you guys set up.
And
so I'm curious, why did you set up the listening sessions after
you guys had voted on reconfiguration, not before?
And I'm wondering who is responsible for reviewing the comments submitted
in your surveys?
Where will those be posted?
How can we trust that they will not be filtered to
fit your preexisting biases?
Will any of you be attending those listening sessions?
Is there anything that any of us could say, or that anyone could
say, that would change your positions on reconfiguration, either at those sessions
or here?
I'd also like to address another public speaker.
She said that she represents a quiet majority that is in favor of reconfiguration.
I say let's prove it.
Let the community vote.
Please do not push through this on an impossible timeline without
community buy-in. With community buy-in,
if the community supports reconfiguration, you will all be vindicated,
and the community will trust you once again.
So
I ask,
why did you not consider putting this in front of the community as a vote?
We spoke to the town clerk.
My understanding is that it's not possible for us to submit this
for a vote without your approval or without your recommendation.
So is that something that is still possible?
And
why or why not
did you
make this decision without a community vote?
I think that's it. Thank you.
Thank you, Vladimir.
Good evening. Jen
Fletcher, teacher at the middle school.
I'd like to first start by thanking the board for the work that you guys are doing.
It's not easy. It's certainly not something I would want to do, and I really don't
wish an inbox flooded with emails for all of you at 10:00 at night.
I know how that feels.
I really wasn't planning on coming up here again to speak, but it
appears that this is probably my last chance.
So I'm here to speak again about the decision to eliminate the 512 percussion
instructor position, one that serves a significant and diverse group of students
across our district. What has been especially difficult about this process is not
necessarily the decision itself, but the message that has seemed to have
accompanied it. That the volume of community support does not matter
and is really not welcome.
Families, students, educators showed up, and they wrote emails, they spoke,
and at multiple points, they were told directly or indirectly that it would not
make a difference,
and that it did not matter how many emails were sent, and we should probably just
stay quiet.
But to me, that level of response is the data.
It is a clear and undeniable indicator of what things this community
values.
This position is not a luxury. It is not expendable.
It is foundational
to a program that reaches students who may not find their place elsewhere.
Students who stay engaged build discipline and who feel a sense of belonging
because of opportunities like this. And this decision does not stand alone.
At the middle school level, we're losing our entire computer science curriculum,
one of two STEM teachers, and two physical education teachers.
Even if one related arts position is brought back, that is not enough to meaningly
restore access. It does not ensure that students will have consistent, equitable
opportunities to experience related arts.
It does not replace the breadth of programming that is being lost, nor does it
support the well-rounded education we say we value.
We were told tonight that the positions listed in the slides are the positions that
are worthy of being reinstated. And I would ask, based on
what?
And without meaningful consideration of the voices of the students, families, and
educators who will be directly impacted, because from what I've seen and heard
in our community and at these meetings, the related arts positions being
cut are not only worthy, but they are essential.
Related arts are not extras. They are where many students connect to school,
discover strengths, and find their place.
When you remove these opportunities, you are not just narrowing a curriculum,
you are limiting access, engagement, and belonging for the very students we are
trying to reach. If community voice truly matters, then this is your moment to
prove it by listening and by acting.
30 seconds.
Thank you.
Thank you, Jen.
Jamie Watson, teacher at the middle school.
I want you to know that today, when the slides came out, you
had five teachers who were on edge, kind of wondering what was going to happen.
Because simply on the new slide it said, "Related arts teachers."
Mm-hmm.
We had no idea who it was, what it was going to be teaching.
So we had two teachers who have to apply for jobs wondering if it was going to be
them. One who's applying to other jobs but could have a job in the next
year to be determined. Me, I have no clue where I'm going to be next year, but
grateful to have a job, and one elementary teacher hoping that the right
one is put back so that his position is retained.
I want to go to the slide
where it answers the questions
about related arts for PE, that people could put up
questions they could submit.
The scheduling has not been finalized for the '26, '27 school year.
Waiting for the budget to be passed.
But it's pretty certain that students will no longer take a full
year of PE.
Health is a one-semester class and will continue to be so.
All students take health each year. That's not true.
You have four PE teachers that also teach health.
I can name three students in my block six PE class who were delighted not to have
health in eighth grade this year because they got to miss the sexual wellness unit.
So that's not true. We're going to continue to support alternate PE classes
for students. I'm not sure how, because we often take kids
every day. We take kids in our eighth grade class who are seventh graders,
and vice versa. Unified sports will continue as long as we have someone willing to
coach and interested athletes and peer partners.
You're always going to have interested athletes.
They're our life skills students, our
autism program students. You're always going to have those students interested and
peers. We had a waiting list and had to tell students they couldn't be peer
helpers.
If all students don't have PE,
the equity gap widens. So you use that word a lot, right?
Equity.
Students from higher income households often play sports, have safe places to be
active, have access to gym equipment, transportation, travel
sports, all the above. Students from low income or homeless
situations often rely on school as their only place for structured physical
activity, may not have safe outdoor spaces, may not have
access to organized sports or travel sports.
PE teachers often help students get involved in school sports, filling out
registrations, getting them the correct equipment, and helping with
transportation home to and from games and practices.
We also advocate for equitable bus stops, and that really
hasn't happened this year either for our students who live in the Red Bank area.
We have more stops on the city with our higher income middle class
than we do for our low income, and I can't get transportation to extend
stops for our lower income students.
I think that's important to note. Adaptive PE, unified sports, and
Special Olympics will not continue in the same capacity.
There's just not time in the day to do that.
There's no money to pay people after school for a stipend.
Cutting PE disproportionately harms-
30 seconds
... the exact students who need it the most.
And I just want to reiterate what Jen Fletcher said.
Our related arts classrooms are where our students feel the most welcome in school.
It's where they're sometimes the most successful.
I hear that a lot when I go to IEP meetings.
And I would just really like transparency.
Please don't put SPMTS, S related arts on a slide and leave
five people wondering all day, is it them? Thank you.
Thank you, Jamie.
Hi, I'm Caitlin Lefever. I am the FLS teacher at Dyer
Elementary, and I started this meeting at home on my couch in Westbrook,
but felt so compelled to come back to South Portland.
I am here because I want to talk about the OT position.
I've talked to many of you about it.
I can review of how valued it is, but what I'm just going to do is the
facts.
We're not staffed for ed techs, and if you look at the
emails that Allison Spalding sends out every week,
it's listed Special Education ed techs one, two, and three.
They are not filled. They were taken off this last week, which I thought was a
coincidence.
But no, we are not staffed for ed techs. We cannot attract ed techs.
It's hard work. I have wonderful people in my room.
It is hard work, and it's a safety concern,
and if you get rid of these OTs, it
will be two OTs, four ed tech positions.
The other program at Dyer,
I don't think any other ed techs are coming back. I think there's five or six.
None of them are coming back. So we will not be
staffed. It will not be safe.
The other thing I'm going to say is that in our contract, we get a
45-minute lunch.
In my 14 years here, I think I've taken a
45-minute lunch once or twice. I do not leave my
room for more than 30 minutes for safety.
Thank you.
Thank you, Caitlin.
Connie.
Hello.
I'm Connie DeSanto, and I'm a parent, taxpayer, and employee
in the district. I'm also president of our support staff union,
and I did not plan on speaking this evening.
However, when there appeared to be a lot of confusion from district
leadership over the state of staffing and concerns specifically
regarding the staffing in special ed,
I could not sit in silence.
For those of you that don't know, I am a special ed tech,
and that's what I do when I'm not being president of
our support staff union. So
I attend a lot of meetings as association president,
and almost all of those meetings are on unpaid time.
So that means before school and after
school. But
I have been very clear with district leadership,
verbally and over email, since the end of
September regarding my inability to
schedule any meetings before school unless
they were willing to come to Kaylor and meet with me so
that I was not late for my duties, and therefore potentially leaving
my coworkers in an unsafe situation.
Staffing concerns and safety issues are the number one concerns
I hear from my members working in special ed, and I
echo what Sarah Gay said about being very relieved we are finally
giving some real attention to these issues.
They are very real,
and staff safety is very important.
So I would like to know, with this budget as it is, how you are
going to ensure our staff are safe.
Thank you.
Thank you, Connie.
Hello.
Wheeler Boyd Bofa, South Portland resident. Good evening.
It's become painfully clear to me through this budget cycle just how much the
public role in the process can be diminished.
The boundary committee steering report is a tough read right now with all its very
real talk about transparency and stakeholder engagement and
recommendations for more of the same.
At the beginning of this year, we departed pretty sharply from that track.
Could you speak right into the mic? Sorry.
Yes. Sorry.
Apart from petitioning or voting in referendums, the public is owed only
transparency and engagement, but both have been lacking, and
worse, solicited input is not reliably responded to.
Less than a third of the solicited information requests have been responded to
during this budget cycle. We're told at the start of each public comment session
that questions will be answered if possible.
If the answer is not available, someone will be assigned to follow up when the
answer is available. I've seen good faith efforts by board
members that I'm grateful for to answer questions in session, but never
anything resembling comprehensive follow-up.
I'm glad Board Member Feller suggested last week
that questions be captured for follow-up, but it's telling that it needed
suggesting.
A formal channel was offered for information requests, and again, we've only heard
back on a third of them at most.
Many of our public institutions build trust by interfacing with the public on a
good faith basis. When that trust is eroded, the public is left scrambling for
other options.
I'm not categorically opposed to school closure and/or reconfiguration as a
means to help address the current budget crisis and/or further the district's
mission and vision, but I do not believe a sufficient case has been made for
a closure or a configuration. And I also don't believe there was
sufficient due diligence in determining the specific school to close or the
model of reconfiguration to pursue.
I wish we could petition both decisions, but Maine law only provides the option in
the case of a school closure.
In the spirit of transparency, I want to make the board, the district, and the
community aware that I requested the city clerk prepare petitions to challenge the
closure of Kaylor. To be clear, I do not plan to begin collecting
signatures before aligning with community members across our five districts,
especially those in the Kaylor community.
But given the circumstances, I feel strongly that we should be prepared to proceed.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Lauren.
Lauren Shapiro, Deak Street.
I want to start with some fundamental questions.
Have we formally asked elementary educators what class sizes are
realistically manageable after losing support staff?
Have we consulted them on whether redistricting or
reconfiguration is feasible after such significant
reductions?
Should we be making sweeping decisions about classroom conditions without first
consulting the people who live them every day?
Change of this magnitude should never be rushed.
Proposing options that drastically increase educators' workloads puts
their ability to maintain realistic, sustainable expectations
and the success of their students at risk.
Increasing class sizes while losing critical staff doesn't just make
things incrementally harder, it multiplies the difficulty.
Attempting either proposal on such a compressed timeline
guarantees strain, disruption, and results that fall short of what students
and educators deserve. This strain raises a critical
question about how resources and expectations are being distributed across the
district. Will middle and high school class sizes
really be smaller than in elementary schools?
If so, how is that justified when our youngest learners need the
most individualized attention, structure, and support?
This imbalance alone undermines the plan.We need to be
honest about how we got here. These challenges did not appear overnight.
They developed over years by certain voices and agendas.
And now the community is asked to absorb rapid, disruptive change in a
matter of months to fix these long-building issues.
That is not a fair exchange.
If the problem took years to create, the solution deserves more time,
more care, and a process that reflects its magnitude.
So I ask you to pause on all fronts. We have made cuts that will
undoubtedly impact our students and staff.
We cannot compound that impact by rushing structural changes at the same
time. Keep Taylor's doors open and pause reconfiguration.
If we are going to make changes this big, they should be fair, thoughtful, and done
right. Not rushed, not forcing some students and staff to carry the weight of these
changes while others do not. We can solve for this.
There are funding options. Ask for them. Lead.
But do not make decisions of this scale and scope on a timeline like this.
Do not lead us down a path where the costs are completely unknown.
It is fiscally irresponsible repeating the same trust-
30 seconds, ma'am
... process approach that brought us here.
The true cost of the current plan remains largely a mystery.
We lack a clear picture of all cost implications, including the ripple
effects on student learning. Make no mistake, these costs could
easily outweigh or even erase entirely any projected
savings. Instead of applying these unknown and potentially
vastly underestimated costs to redistrict and reconfigure,
let's use the numbers we know right now to save jobs and protect the
stability of our schools and students-
That's three minutes
... deserve come fall. Thank you.
Thank you, Lauren.
Before this next speaker begins, we're just two minutes from our ending
time. Without objection, we will hear from these three final speakers
and then close public debate. Is that fine? Okay, great. Thank you.
That's terrific news because I was going to try and speak really quickly.
So good evening.
Go right ahead.
I am Peter Wetzel. I am a South Portland resident and also a teacher at South
Portland Middle School. As an educator whose position
has been proposed for elimination and who has been waiting to find solace in a
solution, it is my opinion that this updated budget
proposal and the associated slides that were released today have done more
harm than good. Don't get me wrong, more money is great,
and an amazing boost for the district.
But with this money came decisions that became
slides
that have pitted departments against each other in public forums based on
a formula that seems to have been made without SPTA guidance.
As has already been addressed in the presence of this board, any budget
slide that presents financial support or even the suggestion
thereof to one specific educator or group of educators
inherently leaves out the other members of our bargaining unit
who stand to lose their jobs under the budget proposal.
I am a member of that unit, and I stand in solidarity for
and with all teachers who may lose their jobs.
In the past several weeks, teachers, students, and citizens have stood up and
rallied for their something.
All of these somethings are valid, as it is a shame to lose any of
our professional and passionate educators.
That being said, the method in which the initial cuts were
approached and the current method that appears to be putting some
back has been wielded in an unwieldy
fashion.
Proposed classroom teacher positions that might be returned are one-year
contracts. Then what?
Educators are back in the same position a year from now, possibly for
the third time.
Would you choose that?
I continue to await word on the fate of my position and those of all my
colleagues at risk. While I do, I continue to
teach as we all do.
Thank you.
Thank you, Peter.
Hi, everyone. I'm Alex Hoyt. I'll try to stand up straight this time.
This is for-- First of all, thank you guys for everything.
This is for board members who voted in favor of configuration.
I'm writing as a resident parent, someone who's deeply invested in our schools and
community.
Our current fiscal situation took years to develop.
It's not something that can be responsibly unwound on an accelerated
timeline of four months, in my opinion, without consequence.
Moving at this pace risks real harm to trust, to our community, and to the
experience of our children,
and staff, I might add.
What's especially concerning is that the current path appears misaligned with the
board's own previously adopted actions from the 2024 Elementary Boundaries and
Configuration Steering Committee.
More specifically, action 20A, which called for a formal analysis of
attendance zones and viable configurations guided by a consultant and
presented publicly. Action 20B, which established the
need for ongoing review, policy structure, and annual reporting on
demographic impacts.
These actions were voted on and approved.
They were meant to guide this exact moment.
Yet today, we're being asked to move forward with sweeping reconfiguration without
clear evidence that these foundational steps, independent analyses,
structured review, and transparent reporting, have been fully carried out or
communicated.
At this point, the issue is not just speed, it's the absence of a clear, detailed
plan grounded in the framework already established.
Right now, there's no roadmap that gives families confidence in how this will be
implemented successfully.
For that reason, I'm respectfully asking for the following: a pause in the current
timeline and a formal motion to reconsider the prior
reconfiguration vote.
We need time, we need transparency, and we need adherence to the process the board
itself adopted. These steps are not obstacles, they're safeguards
for thoughtful decision-making, community trust, and equitable
outcomes.There's still an opportunity here to rebuild trust and
secure meaningful community buy-in, but that window will close quickly
if the process continues at its current pace.
I urge you not to take that opportunity for granted.
In addition, and this is a little bit of a deviation from my
previous topic, but I'm just curious.
I have a couple questions, and thank you
Daniel and Eleni for addressing some of these.
I just was wondering if you had any more details.
Is there any plan to have stakeholder input for the superintendent search?
And if so, at what point in the process
might that input be
injected or received?
And given that we're using a third-party firm,
Zeal, to help us with that superintendent search,
and given the already strained trust and communication
throughout our little environment here in South Portland-
Three minutes
...
so
why wasn't the idea of a stakeholder-led committee proposed or voted on
and asked of that firm? Thank you.
Thank you, Alex.
Good evening board members. Caroline Bowman, parent and
resident in South Portland. I wasn't planning to get up here and speak
tonight, but then hearing everybody else get up and talk,
I was moved to put some thoughts together.
I apologize if they're not as organized as last week.
First, I want to thank board members Richardson and Feller for your thoughtful
questions. To other board members and to folks
standing up here presenting, we can tell that you're advocating for
families and students, and really thinking critically of the impact here beyond
what is a dollar amount on the board.
My questions tonight are, why do we not have solid numbers on the
actualized budget costs, and have yet to see
information on the true expenses for
moving extra hours of planning and physical building
upgrades when we are just a couple of months out from the end of the school year?
I urge the board to put a pause on reconfiguration
and also consider keeping all five elementary schools open until
the end of the 2027 school year.
This longer runway is necessary to make the changes thoughtfully and
successfully.
Last week, I came here and spoke in
advocacy and support for our middle school related arts positions.
I still feel very strongly about keeping all of those positions.
Other people tonight have spoken as such.
I agree with all that we need to keep
Mr. Wetzel,
Mrs. Watson, Mr. Lenzen, and the other teachers that are
impacted. In the past month, I have watched more hours of school board
meetings than ever before in my life, and I still admit I am not caught up
to speed. However, the first mention that I could find of school
closure and major reconfiguration on this timeline
was in the written summary of the February 9th board meeting.
But it is worth noting that nothing was shown in the slides,
and I wonder how much of this was available to community
members. And really, it was at the March 9th meeting, so
just almost exactly a month ago, when these sweeping changes
were brought to the attention of the community.
And in such,
the only people aware are people working in the district or families with
current students, because to my knowledge, no public
notice goes out unless you receive the superintendent's emails.
And even with that, as a parent, I missed it the first time because you have to-
30 seconds
... click on another link, and nobody's super excited to read something about a
budget when it doesn't mention that a school closure and massive
reconfiguration is on the table. So,
questions that I have additionally are, why was the
closure of an elementary school and a district-wide
reconfiguration not treated as a policy change requiring two
readings under policy BFG?
And
since
this timeline has happened so-
That's three minutes
... Quick. Okay. Can I just finish real quick?
All right.
I
wonder if there's a way to better communicate this to families, because
many people impacted by this in South Portland are still completely unaware,
either because of language
differences, and not currently having children in school, but
starting in the next couple of years, have no clue this is happening.
So, thank you.
Thank you, Caroline.
Public comment's hereby closed. Thank you,
and thank you to
everyone for being succinct and
helping us to keep to the 75-minute timeline.
And that was really great, so I appreciate that.
I have some questions and probably some other people got some questions, so I'll go
down through what I have first. And
so let me see. Do you have any questions that you want, or do you want me to start?
You can start.
Okay. So, the
first question I have
and
I didn't get the person's name because that would just help people know which
question I'm on, but
how are we planning to address
city...
No. Are we offering an idea? Oh, yeah.
How are we planning to address
city lines
in terms of
attendance zones? So, I don't know if you want to come up
to help answer some of these questions, because I'm not going to know the answers
to them, or
Superintendent Entwistle will know how we're addressing
city lines.
Yep.
So,
I believe that we know that there are going to have to be some adjustments, but I
don't know that we know exactly what those are going to look like.
That's
a part of the configuration
planning and will be addressed.
I believe we know that there will be some
movement of those,
but that's just a detail that we do not have at this point.
The next question I have is,
are we offering the idea of staggering start time for
the two elementary schools? Is that a
consideration or...
I'll turn that to you as well.
I don't know that we've considered that.
I think that we are,
again,
having these listening
sessions with folks,
trying to make sure that we've got all of the details that do need to
be addressed.
And as we move forward, they will be addressed.
If we don't have the basic-
There's no
interaction with the public, please.
Mm-hmm.
No interaction with the public, please.
Thank you.
Appreciate cooperation with that. Thank you.
The next question I have, someone wanted to know where Board Member
Dowling is, and he's not able to be present tonight.
If there's any further decision about that or action, it will be announced at the
next meeting. That's what I can tell you right now.
Someone wanted to know, um-
He's in favor. He resigned.
It's in the process.
Yeah. Thank you.
All right.
Reconfiguration is...
Well, okay. So I think that's the only question I got from that person.
The next question
I have
is,
should there be more cuts to administration, and should the board's
goal be to provide... Oh, okay. So should the board's goal be to
provide excellent education, or is adequate sufficient?
It's not really a question. We would have to have a whole discussion
about where board members are on that.
So that's
not a question that we can give you any answer to.
I mean, people might-
Can we just do a quick straw poll?
No.
I mean, I don't-
No. It would be a full board discussion.
So we'll hold that and-
I can speak to this.
Yeah. That'd be great, George. Thank you.
Great. Thank you.
As superintendent, adequate for me has never been
enough, and would never be enough.
We're always looking to create
the best
learning outcomes for every student.
And that's really seeking excellence, not happy with
being adequate.
Thank you.
And this question
was also asked by Board Member Richardson, so I think it
warrants being asked again. What is the plan for replacing the
OTs in the FLS class? I believe that was one of the questions you
asked. And,
yeah, I don't know who wants to answer that, but...
I don't think that there is a specific plan right now.
Do you want to add anything to that, Dr. Prince?
I think what I would like to take the opportunity to acknowledge
is the theme in public comment of concerns on the plan.
We hear them. Going through each one of them
to
help the community understand
exactly what's coming is a reasonable request on the part of
our stakeholders.
And again, we have been putting the bulk of our
energy into getting a budget completed.
It's now April 7th.
Our charge, starting back in December, was to
land with a 6% tax increase, which meant cutting $8.4
million from our budget. The administrative team has worked
on this again and again and again to try and bring forward
something that does the most good for kids
and the least harm, recognizing that when you
have a reduction of that magnitude, there is harm that is
caused. People's jobs have been lost.
So I understand and I hear the questions that the
room has, and that is our obligation to
bring that plan back to the board.
Going through every single one of them tonight, I will do my
best to answer them. But I think it might be more
useful for me to say they are heard.
Someone asked about who's reading the survey and is it being
edited?
We are reading the survey. I think you can ask folks who are present in the Kahler
listening session this morning. That absolutely wasn't edited.
I put back in front of them quotes from that survey
that represented the real and honest questions that
teachers have that we have an obligation to hear,
the negative feedback, um-So again,
the goal here is to try and support a process
that's going to bring the best educational outcomes for this
community, and
working to meet the timeline of the budget, and
understanding I'm a parent myself.
I understand what it's like to have to think about before care, after care, and
that happens months before your child is in those programs.
So again, just want to sort of acknowledge that
to the extent that there's other questions that you feel would be
useful. I tried to address the OT.
Certainly, you've had staff come up here and say that that was an
incomplete analysis, so that means that we need to get back around the
table and make sure that we are hearing their voices.
What we have done is looked at service minutes, and we've compared
those to what our staffing ratios are, what the
regulations suggest, and how our neighboring
districts have been able to accomplish different
ratios and different staffing scenarios than we have.
So again, I just want to honor the comments that are in front of you
and say that they are heard, and that's the continued work
ahead for
our team and for us to bring back to the board.
And thank you, Dr. Prince. If you can stay there, there's just a couple things that
I think you can answer.
Sure.
There were a number of questions that were about reconfiguration-
Sure
... so I'm not going to try to go over those. I heard what you just said.
There were many questions about deciding what students would go to
what school, and those are all part of the plan-
Correct
... as I understand. So we won't go through those questions
tonight.
And
there
was a question that one member brought up,
felt like we were or I was specifically trying to
answer easy questions and avoid hard questions. That's certainly ...
Hard questions just might be hard for me to answer, but that's not my
goal and we are trying to get at all these
questions as best we can. So that's not really my
intent, but I appreciate the
question and the comment about that.
There was a question about
that
either you or Dr. Entwistle might be able to answer.
What are the cost savings with one start and stop time at the middle
school, and
why we haven't done that? So there's an answer to that, so maybe-
Sure. The opening of the middle school was predicated,
and the approval permit was on two start times.
Mm.
So again, we began the exploration of moving to a single start
time.
We are undertaking the required traffic study, to
start next week, two weeks from now, apologies, I
don't have that,
such that we can begin the permitting process to see if traffic conditions have
changed so that we could be on a path to a single start
time. But what we have been told is that
the approval needs to come through the Department of
Transportation, so we've begun that process and hope to
move forward through the request for reconsideration there.
Thank you. And the
other question that I think you could answer is, was with regard to
Kaylor closure, and are you hoping to need this as a school,
and what was the reason that we would
maintain possession of the school over the next several
years?
Sure. It's a good question. I think
that all of our demographic analysis, when you look at sort
of birth rate data for incoming classes, does not suggest a
population growth. However, we experienced a population growth that was
not related to our population living here.
So we are aware of that and want to be thoughtful.
So I think
the recommendation to retain the building is twofold.
I think it is to
let us see what happens in the next step.
It also, we have spoken at other meetings about our obligations
around three and four-year-olds, and the transition that we are on
with taking over child development services.
And so again,
wanting to be aware of what that will look like.
There are not a lot of roadmaps in the state for what that
transition looks like. There are folks who are ahead of us,
but not quite at the scale of district.
All the large districts in the state, or I should say the majority of the large
districts, also joined in cohort three, so we don't have a lot of
peer comparison there. Additionally, by retaining Kaylor,
if we were able to find an appropriate organization to
lease the building, it would also allow the board and the city
to generate revenue.
Thank you. The
next set of questions are more about the process
around reconfiguration. So why did you set up
listening sessions after and not before?
And then there was where are the comments shared?
Yeah, I'll start with that.
Sure.
Why listening sessions were set up
after the decision and not before.
Sure. And
we will take our criticisms where people want
to give us feedback on the process.
When
we have been going through this, we have done our best to
find
a way to balance the time and what are the priorities, and we
can take the community feedback that that should've been done earlier.
However, umYou know, the next best time
to plant the tree is now. And so we are taking the
opportunity to try and hear from our community,
to hear what their priorities are.
The session at Kaler this morning was incredibly well-attended and
thoughtful, productive to identify the themes and the
topics. I have no doubt the other
upcoming sessions will be as well.
The board is invited to any of those sessions
that we'll move through this with.
The next question, Dr. Prince, was about why the
recommendation was not for the board to consider this for a public
vote.
So again, I think that goes back to state statute and the
obligation or the rights of a school board.
This is within what the purview of a school board is.
The way these processes do happen
is through your school board. I think it's important to note
again that the recommendation in front of the board is not for the
immediate closure of Kaler. That is where there is
citizen action. Because we are recommending, I think someone used the
term shuttering, which is better than mothballing-
... the school. It is to my understanding of the
law, that
does not go through the public referendum process.
Thank you. And,
there was a question towards the end of the speakers, which
was about
the changes and the recommendations, and
I know this just got handled today.
So was there guidance from the teachers' union?
Sure. And I think that is important feedback that got
shared today.
We have been engaged with the teachers or all of our
associations over the last five or so weeks as we've been
in the budget process, and we have been
listening to them. But to the extent that they had specific
input on what was in front of the slides tonight,
no, we did not specifically go back to the table.
And
again, if that's something that the board feels we need to pause or
we need to reconsider on, certainly want to meet our obligation
there.
We had felt we had met our meet and consult obligation to
listen and try and hear what their questions were.
But again, I apologize if we missed the
correct procedural invitation there.
Thank you. And I think there were maybe some other questions.
The last one
that I can try to answer is,
was there any plan for stakeholder input on the superintendent
search? And
that was definitely part of the proposal from Zeal,
which is why
their goal was being here, being
present for two days for in-person and then for
a number of virtual contacts,
some in-person interviews, interview
set up in each one of the schools,
an interview with all the union leaders.
So there was an effort to
get input from stakeholders. And the process at
this point will be that the board will
interview
semifinalists and finalists
during the month of April.
So did you have some other questions that you wanted to-
I-
I don't know if there were questions that were... Yeah. I'm sorry.
I mean, Joe, I would like to hand you all of
these reconfiguration questions so you have them-
Yes, please. Yeah
... for like...
I
appreciate that we don't have a lot of answers, so it feels a little
bit pedantic to kind of hear that over and over and over again.
But I did write every single one of them down, and I will
share them-
Sure. Thank you
... with you.
We appreciate the help.
Yeah, of course.
I would like to talk about
the feedback we've been getting on the superintendent
search and lack of stakeholder participation in those interviews.
I don't know if right now is the time for that.
Yeah.
I-
I don't know
... think the time would be tomorrow night.
Tomorrow night.
Yeah.
That's what I was thinking.
Okay.
Yeah.
Tomorrow night we have a meeting with Zeal.
Right.
So.
So yeah, that would be a good time to talk about it.
Were there-
I'm just-
Member Smith, did you have any other questions?
No.
And I'm sorry, Member Richardson, did you-
I'm sorry. I'm just
trying to make sure I didn't miss any.
I think most of them-
Yeah, most of them.
Oh, I did. There is one question.
Will middle and high school have smaller classrooms than elementary school
classrooms?
When we are looking at average class sizes, the
average class sizes will all fall within the range.
There are classes at the high school because of the specialty upper-level
dual enrollment. There are classes that do have smaller
enrollments. But again, I think that is fairly
standard with
the regional average in terms of how that works, but on
the whole, the average class sizes do not
appear to be substantially different between levels next year.
Okay. Did you have any other-
I think that's all I have. Yeah.
Oh, okay.
That is in reconfiguration.
No, that's all I got.
Member-
I think this was intended as a question.
It might not have been exactly phrased as it, but I think it was a question which
was-
...
why
hasn't it been possible to extend the number of stops on the west end of the city?
Bus stops, that is. So that wasn't exactly put as a question, but I did
star that because it seemed like it kind of was one.
And
let me see if I have anything else.
And I just want to say, Member Holland-
And that's a question that I'll follow up with-
Sorry. Is there going to be an answer? Yeah, I'm sorry.
Yeah.
I shouldn't laugh
I'll follow up with the person that asked that in terms of whether that was
local transportation or metro.
I'd like you to follow up with me, please.
Tell me, too, because I think I'd like to know that.
Okay. No, I thought it was a great question.
I appreciate that being brought to our attention.
Yes.
I appreciate that very much.
Let's see.
Oh.
I don't know if this is one of the ones you were going to send to Joe,
but there was a question about
the community voting on the idea of
reconfiguration.
She answered.
I think that answer was already answered. Okay, nevermind.
I don't believe I answered that. I believe I answered the question regarding
school closure.
Oh, okay. All right.
So-
Go ahead.
I'm sorry, Claire, if you have the question, would you mind reading it?
Well, and I try and write really fast, so I'm not sure if I have it worded in the
way in which it was posed. However, where was that? Hang on.
I mean, I-
Do you have it?
Yeah.
Okay, thanks.
I had, why did we, meaning the board, not consider putting this
to a referendum, the reconfiguration?
That's
what I thought was answered.
Yeah.
That's correct.
Sure. School attendance zones are a matter of board policy.
So again, that is within the purview of a board's power.
If there is a mechanism for you to
seek a citizen vote on it, that might also exist.
But I do think that
the school board was acting within its authority to reconsider
attendance zones. Again, that may not preclude legally opening a different
route for getting feedback, but I do not
believe that that's required.
Member Holland?
Is it possible to comment on that?
Yeah. Please.
Well, I think one other additional reason might be that
a lot of the people who might be concerned may not be
able to vote.
I don't mean the kids, I mean residents who are parents.
There are a lot of parents who are not able to vote who have students in this
community. Most of them are where we have the fewer bus stops.
So that is, I think, a legitimate reason.
Thank you.
Did I? Oh.
Please, no.
Yes, completely.
No. Yeah. No comments from the public. Thank you.
Appreciate that.
One more?
Nope.
Yeah.
I can't.
Any other comments or questions here?
Okay, seeing that,
we're
up to new business, which is consideration and action
to adopt the FY27 superintendent budget.
Can we take a five-minute recess?
Just going to ask my next question because...
I was going to say a 10-minute break.
Whatever, yeah.
Okay.
Thank you.
We'll take a 10-minute break, and
that was what I was going to ask right after I read that.
So,
we will be back here at 10 past 9:00. Thank you.
Thank
you, everybody. We're back in
session.
Thank you.
Let me just see. I just wrote...
There was a question that we did miss, and
this is a question for the board: Given the tight timeline and the
district's recent budget challenges, what concrete checkpoints
will the board have in place between now and August to
ensure reconfiguration remains the best choice?
And how will early warning signs, whether
they're cracks in the implementation plan or unexpected costs, be
addressed before momentum alone carries the district
too far? So,
is there any board member who wants to take on that question?
Yes, Member Richardson.
I
know that some of the most
compelling
feedback we're getting
as a board is classroom teachers who are going to have to shoulder
the responsibility of this transition.
And
I
think that
I would like
to have some kind of analysis of the feedback
sessions presented to the board.
Plus,
classroom teachers, please reach out to us. Please.
There's no judgment in what you're telling.
Your opinion, personally to me, is the most important one.
Happy teachers mean happy children,
for the most part.
But stressed out teachers, no bueno.
That makes me real nervous.
You guys have had a really challenging year.
And
I know
the level of uncertainty with the plan is
causing angst, and that's what I'm hearing from teachers, and I'm very
worried about that. So I would ask that we, as a board,
have some kind of synopsis of the engagement sessions, plus
whatever feedback we can gather from the
classroom teachers.
Excuse me.
I
think we all agree reconfiguration is
likely the best path forward for our community.
I
have a hard time arguing against it, given everything that I know, but
I am very terrified of the stress of
this timeline and our inability to answer pretty basic
questions.
So I know our next public
I mean, I think it's early. Is it early Monday?
It's Monday, actually.
Oh, gosh.
Yeah. I
think the next couple of weeks are pretty crucial.
And I know we're heading into spring break, but I think that we
should have some kind of
meeting of the minds and after we get through this budget,
understanding there are costs embedded in this budget.
Yeah. That's what I think.
Thank you very much, Member Richardson.
Does anybody want to add to that or...
Yes,
Ms.
Ketchum.
Hi. Abigail Ketchum, Director of Finance.
I think for me, a financial goalpost here that is
relevant is, so we added that 179,000 to contingency.
I think if I start seeing unknown costs start to reach that,
that would give me pause.
And I'm happy to keep people abreast of that and
so we're aware of that. But that would be something where I'd want us to think more
about. Thank you.
Great. Thank you.
I just-
Thank you. Member Holman, please.
I guess it's not really an answer, but I just want to second a lot of what Member
Eleni has said, is that
teachers' input is extremely important, and that we
can work with them as closely as possible, I think is vital.
And I like that idea of,
because we can't attend all the sessions, I'm sure, but as much information as we
can get will be really appreciated.
Thank you. Anyone else?
Okay, so we are at new business.
We have a motion consideration and action to adopt the
FY27 superintendent's budget as the board's budget
proposal to be advanced to the city council.
So if I can have a motion and a second to put that
on the table, and then we can discuss where we want to go with it.
Move by
Member Feller and seconded by Member Risch.
Member Feller.
I'm not going to support the budget tonight.
There's a couple reasons.
One is that the board recently voted to reengage with city
council and discuss with them
their guidance around us raising more tax revenue, which I think is a
conversation we need to have.
It doesn't seem like we're going to stumble upon a pot of money
from them, and they've talked to us about a loan.
But I think it's the least we can do given how
challenging this budget year has been.
We need to exhaust all possibilities for finding
every dollar.
There's no harm in a conversation, so we really should
be talking to them.
Because I think
if their guidance changes,
that means that some of those dollars, and there are
dollars from the state that we've been given now, specifically
for unhoused and marginalized students, some of those dollars are going into
contingency. So that doesn't make a lot of
sense to me. I think if we're putting money into contingency, that should
maybe come from elsewhere.
That is
my position.
Yeah.
Thank you. Member Risch.
I think it's time to vote for the budget, and I plan on voting for it.
There are a lot of people's lives who are negatively impacted,
and right now they just have a letter that says they may be impacted.
We owe them a decision,
and I think we can go to the council and try to do better,
but it's been my impression hearing from various people that they could give us
a loan,
and
I don't know if we need another loan.
I think it's time to vote yes so we can move the process to the
council and work with the council as they have the budget.
Other members, Member Holman.
I just want to say that I also think we probably need to go ahead and support this
budget at this time because
last year,
our budget meeting got canceled by the school board because we
hadn't approved a budget. I don't know how much they want to talk to us until we
have a budget approved. And you can always add money.
There's nothing to say you can't add money to a budget.
A, if
we get there and they say, "We really want you to add another percent to
the tax range,"
you can always add. And I think we need to get
to the point where we can talk to them about that
honestly with something on the table.
So that's I think a strong reason for me and
yeah.
Member Smith.
I got a lot of thoughts that I just wrote down in the last 15 minutes.
I won't share all of them, but
I think primarily I would just want to say that this budget is really about harm
reduction.
Eight and a half million dollars
off of a budget is going to affect our schools
negatively, no matter how you slice it, and the students who most
rely on our schools are going to be hurt the most, and there's just no question
about it. There's no getting around that,
and there's nothing we can do about that.
But what we can do is try to reduce harm in any way that we can,
and the district and building administrators have come to us with a budget that
aims to reduce that harm for all of our students.
And they've developed this based on years of experience in these schools
and spending careers managing the big picture of incredibly
complex educational systems. And they see what our kids experience
every day, and they, in their best judgment, have given us a budget to
solve as many problems as we can.Our job as a board
is to ensure that they are doing the work to the best of their
ability. It's not our job to make decisions about harm reduction in our schools,
because none of us on this board here are in those schools every single
day.
I'm incredibly confident that they have done that work, and that we are putting our
district on a sustainable path forward with extra care and attention given to our
students who need it most. School closure is a part of that, and
reconfiguration is absolutely a part of that.
We owe it to our staff and families to pass this budget now so that they can have
answers about their future, and we can move forward as a district
to make the substantial change work for everybody.
Delaying this vote does a disservice to the immeasurable expertise and hard work
that our administrators have put into this budget and to the staff, families, and
student who need answers now. So I absolutely support passing this
budget.
Thank you, Member Smith.
Member Richardson.
I
think we gave our
administrators
an impossible challenge
by telling them to cut $8 million and
continue to
shield taxpayers from how much it actually
costs to run this school department.
Members on this board for years put off
pushing onto taxpayers how much it costs to run
this district by dipping into fund balance,
and
that's not a judgment. It's
an understandable decision that probably was not
provided or informed enough because the numbers that they were
looking at,
quite frankly, probably weren't right.
So,
we have to think about
right-sizing this budget in a way that,
yes, mitigates harm, but does it in a responsible
way.
So we run the district leaner, but not as lean as
this budget presents, because quite frankly, the
risk inherent in these cuts is really alarming,
and we've talked about the special ed roles, we've talked about
preventative behavior roles,
and we're cutting related arts positions
that stabilize the mental health of our
youth.
Middle school is a dark time
, and these related arts teachers are the joy
and the light. So
I can't approve this budget,
and
I think that there are creative solutions to work towards with the
city council.
I have spent hours talking to other
municipal leaders about how they
strategized with their city leaders
when they were faced with cuts like this, and their
city's leaders
creatively partnered with them.
They shifted infrastructure costs over to
their capital improvement budget.
I have yet to receive an answer as to why we're spending money on school
resource officers when our police budget, I'm sure,
could absorb that cost.
Those are human beings and teachers that we can put
back in our classrooms. Those costs are important to
understand
before we can decide. I also think that my understanding was that the
SPTA was going to be informed on the positions to bring
back. That not happening
is disappointing.
I don't want to choose the ones, but I feel like I have actually spent
a really decent amount of time trying to figure out the
roles that were cut, and really pushing on the gaps
and how we're going to address those gaps, and I don't believe we've
gotten the right answers on the occupational therapist roles, the related
arts roles, and the behavior strategist roles.
So yes, I'm picking. I'm going to name some
because a school department without those roles
is... Yeah. I'm
having a really hard time visualizing that.
We've already done a significant number of harm reduction.
Joe, you have spent a tremendous amount of time putting
numbers into a formula just to get to the right answer, and
that's not your fault. We gave you a number that I think was
impossible.
Thank you.
I'm not thrilled about this budget,
and the reason I will support it
is because it can change again. This
is not the final step, and
I agree with a lot of things that
Member Richardson just said, and I think that there's some more
tweaking that needs to happen in this budget, and I think we can still
do that. I think we have to
get before the council and bring a budget
that we've passed, and then have further
conversations about what do we want to do
next. So I
think that there are a lot of things and some other things that
haven't been mentioned
that I think need to be
reviewed again by this board. But I would like to
emphasize what I thought Board Member Smith
saidWhich I wrote brilliant next to his name
because I just thought it was very well-stated and well-spoken,
and that I do have
some belief and support and trust in our
administration. And
this is not perfect. This is not perfect at all,
and I
think we do, we need to rethink
some of the alignments and some of the things that are happening in this budget,
but I don't think this is the final step.
So I think if we go to the council, we have our meeting
on Monday, again, we go to the council on Tuesday.
It's actually just a presentation
of the budget.
It's their workshop, so
there needs to be consideration for how we approach that and what
the next steps are. But I think at this point,
this is our fourth time looking at
this budget, and
I appreciate the changes that were
made tonight, and I don't agree with all of them.
And I think
there needs to be some further consideration,
but at this point, I will support moving the budget
forward as the school board's budget and going to the city
council and then continuing conversation.
And I think there's a couple of options.
I
know people talked about
a loan.
A loan can happen from the city council at some later
time. Or it can happen now, but it can happen at some later time.
But the greater question is,
does the board
want to ask for a
higher tax burden,
and
is the council willing to support that?
Again, the council's work is only in
guidance, and then they pass through the amount
that we request to the voters or not.
So that's the
important conversation to have. I think it's their job to
determine what they think the taxpayers can bear,
and it's our job, as was said here tonight,
to put together a budget that we
believe
provides the best education we can for our kids.
So, I think there's more work to do, but I think one of the
steps in that work is moving this budget to the council,
which we won't be able to do if we don't pass a budget tonight.
Can I ask a question?
Yes, please.
So after Tuesday,
when we meet with city council,
I guess two questions. Do we have to decide tonight the potential
increase beyond six-- okay. We can decide it there? Okay.
And then
after Tuesday, understanding the tweaking that you just referenced
would
hopefully happen. Do we need to schedule a meeting for
that?
So great question.
Because the calendar is full.
I
think, yeah, I know. But I think-
We can do it
...yeah. I think that what I heard your question, if I'm
correct-
Yeah, sorry
... Member Richardson, is
if we were to pass this budget and go to the council on
Tuesday
and have further conversation about what
the constraints are and what the needs are of the
budget, and what are their recommendations on what to do,
then if we were going to tweak the budget again, we would need to come back
in another session. So I think
looking at calendars and as soon as this meeting adjourns-
Yeah
...
and doing that would be important, just so we have another date on the
calendar.
Yeah. Just so we have another
date on the calendar. Okay?
Thank you.
Yeah.
One other question?
Yes, please.
Is it an invitation
to be there on Tuesday? Because I know when we first met, not all the board was
there with city council or-
Yeah. It's not going to be a time where we're how
we were down on the-
Yeah
... floor, and it's not going to be...
It's really their workshop, so-
Got it
... I will be speaking with Mayor Tipton.
What she has said to me is,
excuse me,
board members
have the ability to be there like any citizen can be there, and have
three minutes at the podium, like everybody here did tonight.
They may have some questions that are asked in general
of the
board, which will be asked either through the chair or through the
administration, depending what the questions are.
So we can certainly have a conversation about
what it is we're hoping to ask them for.
Yeah. We can do that here,
because we can't do it there.
Tonight?
Correct.
Okay, great.
Or we can do it on Monday as well.
Can you restate that?
Yeah, we have a meeting on Monday.
I know that. Oh, right. Okay.
Yeah. We have a regular-
Yeah
... meeting on Monday.
Okay.
So we'll have board. We can have that as an agenda item.
Yeah, I think that'd be great.
Have what as an agenda item, please?
We could have as an agenda item on Monday what we'd like to be
going in to ask the city council for on
Tuesday.And
again, if we
come to some decision, people
can always get up and speak at the council meeting as an individual,
can't speak on behalf of the board.
Unless we take an action and say, "This is
what we're asking for," then people can get up and say, "The board has
had this discussion and has decided this, or wants
this," or whatever.
So it's their workshop
and
we're just delivering a budget.
Thank you.
You're welcome.
Any other questions?
So on this budget vote,
4.1 consideration and action to adopt the FY27
superintendent's budget as the board's budget proposal to be
advanced to the city council.
All those in favor?
Holman, Smith,
DeAngelis, and Risch. And opposed?
Feller and
Richardson, opposed.
So that motion passes. This budget will go to the
council on Tuesday.
And again, it
will go in its present form, but that doesn't mean that's its final form.
Okay.
Thank you. Thank you for that.
And we are at the second public comment and
Member
Risch, just so I'm clear, your motion was to cover
both these public comments. Okay.
So, we're at public comment number
two.
And so this is an opportunity for the board to listen to
opinions of the public that relate to school and education matters on or
off this evening's agenda. The board is here to listen.
Anyone wishing to speak will be asked to proceed to the microphone and
state your name and town or city where you reside.
All questions will be recorded by superintendent or chair,
or anyone else who's helping us, and will be answered at the end of public comment
to the extent possible. As you know, we didn't answer all the questions
tonight. If the answers are not available,
someone will be assigned to reply to you as soon as the answer is available.
You'll be given three minutes to speak.
Tonight, there will be no deferring of, yielding of
time. There'll be no interaction between the public and board
members. Additionally, no clapping, booing, or other interruptive behavior
will be allowed. And as a reminder, school board meetings are broadcast and
posted on the city's website. So please consider that with your comments.
So please, yes.
Hello. Sierra Bowler, resident of South Portland, and I just have one question that
I really hope you'll answer promptly after.
Would the board commit to a second vote on reconfiguration at the
next regular public meeting after April break?
Hi, guys. Alex Hoyt, South Portland.
Probably sick of seeing the same faces over and over-
... and I can appreciate that.
I think that
just listening to the comments, especially Eleni brought up, which I think were
very important.
I don't want to ignore the fact that I think the teachers are going to bear...
We're all stakeholders here. The teachers are going to bear
the most significant brunt of
reconfiguration
amongst all of us in terms of the logistics behind it and what's going to be
demanded of them, or maybe they're so good they'll volunteer
their time, I'm sure. But I don't think that should be an expectation.
And so if formal and concrete feedback is collected and reported
on behalf of the teachers,
and it reflects that they're not in favor of
reconfiguration, would you consider a revote on
reconfiguration if you're supporting those people like you
say you will? Thank you.
Thank you, Alex.
Hi, my name is Jenny Facey. I'm a parent-
I'm sorry. Could you say your name again?
My name is Jenny Facey. I'm a parent and a member of the
community. I grew up in South Portland.
I'm raising my three boys here, one at the middle school and two at Brown School.
I had a much longer speech prepared that I'm not even going to begin to fit in.
I think, in a lot, that I wanted to talk about the budget and reconfiguring,
but I'm going to keep it at just this because so many other people have
already said so many great things I would rather not repeat.
I want to thank board members Richardson and Feller.
I want to say thank you for asking all the hard questions and for keeping our staff
and the community, and the tone of what everyone's been asking for, at the
forefront of your mind with these questions. It does not go unnoticed.
First, I just want to clarify, the only thing I'm going to bring up right now,
because I know so many other people have got all the other things covered.
I just want to clarify something that, quite frankly, makes me continue to wonder
about the trust and transparency that continues to be shown by this school
district. As of one hour ago, the Portland Press Herald released a news article,
Adrian Dowling, Vice Chair of South Portland School Board
resigns. This community deserved to hear it before the
press broke it.
This was another clear example of the lack of transparency this board has shown.
But here we are, you guys asking for us to continue to put our trust in your
decision-making. This community deserves better.
Thank you, Jenny.
Vladimir Korshin again. I hate to be a one-trick pony, but it's going to be about
voting, and this is a response to Claire
Holman's comments. So
93.7%
of
this city are citizens. They are capable of voting.
That means that 6% cannot. I think their voices should be
considered, but I do think it's disrespectful to say that you can speak on behalf
of everyone,
even those voters, because we don't know which way they would
vote. And if it is something that you are serious about, then you have
all of the emails and all of the phone numbers of every student's parents when
they signed up. There are many, many different ways that we can
organize votes to get an idea for where
people really stand on not just reconfiguration, but also closing the schools,
closing Caylor, which I also oppose.
And I
find it kind of confounding how many times when we bring this up, the
answer is, "Well, we could have done that, but we didn't."
And as if it's too late. It's not too late.
Please, please, please, let the community have their voice heard.
The question is, will you do that?
Thank you, Vladimir.
Hello. Charlie from Evans Street. I am not going to make a scene tonight.
Maybe.
All right. So I do have some questions tonight.
Big thing was, we talked a lot about was the Skillen boiler.
Constantly over and over that this boiler may go, may not
go. It's like an old car. You just kind of hit it with a hammer and hopefully it
works.
My question is, if this does go,
where are those students going to go?
If it happens in January, where are those students going to go?
Are they going to stay in that school?
Are they going to have to go to a different school?
Are we going to have to open up Caylor again? What's going to happen?
I also have a question.
Do we have in the fund for Caylor and Dyer's roof
repairs? I know both of those were big topics.
That's why we kind of wish-washed back between the schools.
Do we have those in the fund balance going forward in this budget that the
floor just voted upon?
Do we have that in there going forward with repairs, along with
if the
boiler decides to break?
Reconfiguration costs.
There were no costs before. We sat up here.
I've been to every single one of these meetings.
My son tonight, when I picked him up aftercare, he's like, "Why do you go in one of
these more meetings?" And I was like, "I have to speak again." And he's like,
sorry to swear right now, but my son goes, "Can't they get their s**t together?"
And I want to tell my son that's not the right thing to say, but
he's right.
For reconfiguring costs, now we're seeing
costs getting inflated, going up.
We also talked about bus drivers. I've had some talks with bus
drivers, and it seems like we might be in a problem next
year, a big problem going ahead for the bus drivers.
Bus drivers have to be hired on for the middle school, and now we're
looking at bus drivers going to be gone, and we're going to be short-staffed.
We all remember on Cash Corner, where we had a big banner up, a sign saying,
"Hiring for bus drivers."
It's not going to happen again. So if we're going to
reconfigure, we're going to need a lot more bus drivers going across the city.
I'm still for reconfiguration, but I think it's still soon.
We need to be doing a thoughtful process.
A lot of people stood up here the past five or six
meetings now it's been,
and said we need more thoughtful process in this.
And then on the special ed tech side, I had an introduction
with a lovely lady. I walk my son to Dyer.
She drops off her
daughter every day. She sees an
occupational therapist for their child.
She came out the day that she found out their occupational therapist was
going to leave, broke down, and started crying.
It hit me hard inside knowing what's going to be happening to these
families. We have had a lot of special ed tech people stand up here and talk about
what's going to be happening, and this is not-- passing the budget
tonight-
That's three minutes
... is not okay at all that we are seeing that our special ed techs
are getting gutted along with our arts at the same time.
We know we need those.
Mm-hmm.
Please keep them. Please fix this.
Thank you very much.
Let's
put this laptop down here.
Hello.
All right.
I'm Damien Stevens. I'm a parent over in South Portland.
I would like to provide some insights over what I've gained working in
tech for almost 15 years. I've worked with many of the large language models,
which are GPT, Anthropic, Microsoft, Google stuff, and the tools appear to
make computer science a topic that's redundant
to learn, but they're not.
AI is
not capable of solving novel or complex problems.
Working directly or indirectly with technology, if you understand computer
systems and how they work, you really do have a superpower in
tech. I've seen firsthand a growing shortage of
skilled professionals who can manipulate systems and solve complex
problems.
Mm.
Computer science is not just about coding.
It's about understanding how the pieces fit together, breaking down problems,
troubleshooting effectively, and approaching challenges with a
system mindset.
These are skills that need to be introduced early and developed over time.
I would argue these skills can be applied in any career, particularly
in a decade or beyond from now.
Middle school is a pivotal stage where students form interests and
confidence in subjects that can shape their academic and professional
paths. Eliminating access to computer science education
at this level disproportionately affects students who may
not otherwise be exposed to these opportunities, widening the equity
gaps.
At the time when digital literacy is as
fundamental as reading and math, removing this role undermines the
students' ability to develop critical thinking, problem-solving, and technical
skills that are essential for their future careers.
Rather than cutting this position,
maintaining or strengthening it as an investment in preparing students
for a workforce- ... and society that increasingly depend on technology.
And I've got a little slide here if I have time, and I think I have time.
These are just-
You have one minute left
... three bits of feedback. Pardon? One?
One minute.
One minute. So, just small bits of feedback from the presentation.
It's helpful for me, someone that's not in
students. I don't understand any of the acronyms.
You can start it with definitions. It'll help me ingest it.
I was able to extract the transcripts from all the board meetings
so I can search them really quickly.
If that's available on the website, that would also be helpful because then I could
then search the transcript to see if my question has
already been answered.
Mm.
I can also search for people if they have spoken or not, and it just makes
navigating it really easy.
And for budget,
this may already be in the slides, but having a very clear
slide or a few slides on the investments and reductions for staff in
particular because they're contentious, like reduction of role-
That's three minutes
... plus... Pardon? Three minutes?
Three minutes.
And that was it. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you very much, Jamie.
Good evening. Julia Edwards, 158 Dawson Street.
Kiddo in kindergarten at Skillen and a four-year-old in a local
preschool.
I
appreciate
so much that there is so much engagement.
This has been the fullest
year, probably besides last year, of true meaningful
people that care,
that I've ever seen. And I've been here since I was five.
So, or three, but started school when I was five.
I actually was shorter than Rosemary for
a very brief time in my life.
I was three.
So I really do appreciate, and I think any amount of engagement and
awareness and awakening of consciousness to what's going on in our community is
a good thing.
Having been through so much of these processes that have been talked
about, and been paying attention to them for a number of years,
I want to invite people to think
beyond just the immediate now
and start channeling some energy into what we could do in the future.
Because there is a lot of energy in this room and watching out there tonight.
So, a few things that I'm really interested in seeing more coalescence
around, a universal PTA,
PTO, call it whatever you want. I don't care.
That needs to happen. And the fact that it hasn't,
that's on the PTAs. So,
I just am now in the school system, so I haven't had the opportunity
to be on the PTA.
I'm also in law school full-time, and I work full-time, and so that's not my
journey right now, but that needs to happen.
So, that's number one, and that's an action that the
community can take. The school board cannot force us to do any of that.
So that's on us, collectively, capital U.S.
We need to mobilize maybe as a community of parents and
citizens to help teachers with some of the heavy
lifting. We all care about our teachers and our kiddos, and if
there's teachers that either can't make time to be in their
classrooms to handle whatever logistical things need to happen, we should be the
ones carrying that. I know this community can do it because I saw a
community of about 300 people mobilize within the span of under a
week to help our most vulnerable and most marginalized populations.
So we can do this. Absolutely. So let's roll up our sleeves
and try to work towards
creating that energy-
30 seconds
... and that effort.
I would like to offer that the list of preschools and day cares
is publicly available out in the world
on the State of Maine website. It will take community initiative to
handle putting information out to that population.
But I did that for the entirety of the BCSC time.
It's doable. So if you want communication to happen,
somebody's got to take it on. It's not their job to communicate with under
three-year-olds now.
Nobody's got time for that. So-
That's three minutes
... the community needs to do that.
And also, I would like to have some Kaler families be at the center of
gathering feedback, even asking for an extra session
to gather more feedback from Kaler families so that they can weigh
in more than just for one hour. Thank you.
Thank you, Julia.
One hour and 15 minutes.
Hi, I'm Alex Strube. I have a daughter who is in
second grade and another daughter who is an incoming kindergartner next
year.
I want to thank you all for your time today, and I actually would love to direct my
feedback and comments to Member Holman, because I feel like we had a moment
last week, which was lovely for me, actually.
I was standing here, and before me was Mr.
Wetzel's daughter and then Mr. Wetzel, and I'm just getting
fired up. I'm ready to give my part, and I start sobbing, and I see
you crying, too.
AndI recognize that you
deeply care.
And I think what's so hard is that I see how much you care,
and I'm just asking for how can we bring that forward?
How can we put our decisions aside that have happened before?
How can we put aside these deadlines that we've held up
to hold up the people around us?
I think there's been feedback that we've been pushing for from teachers, right?
We're asking teachers, we want to hear from you.
We just got a bunch of data tonight from our teachers of what they're
saying, and it's not looking good.
And I'm hearing it in parent-teacher conferences, and I'm hearing it from
teachers who are side DM-ing because they don't feel like they can be in public
forums talking about it. And so I don't know how our teachers are going to be
heard, and I'm so grateful for the union and the teachers that are here who are
bringing voices forward, but it's not the full voice.
So that's the teacher, but I want to maybe tell you a little story.
So my daughter is neurodivergent.
About 15% to 20% of the student body population is neurodivergent, as I'm
sure you know.
And
listen, no matter what school she goes to in South Portland, I know she'll have an
amazing staff around her.
But she will struggle when she has to go from school to school
every few years. Her teachers are incredible.
The staff around her are incredible.
But when that face changes, when that location
changes, that is so disruptive. And there is deep
research on this.
And so when we talk about our communities that are being impacted, the students
being impacted, those who need it the most are going to be kids like my
daughter and like a lot of kids we're talking about tonight.
And so I'm just urging you,
I want to have that moment again with you.
I really do. And so I would just love to see how we can-
30 seconds
... move with heart in the rest of this process. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Alex.
Sarah Cohen, Vincent Street. I'm a mother of four and a current student
myself. I have one at the middle school, two at Small, and an upcoming
kindergartner, and I just want to thank the teachers.
I sat at two parent-teacher conferences this afternoon.
One teacher who doesn't know what her job will be, whether it will be here next
year, and one who doesn't know where she'll be teaching, which is all of our
teachers who are sitting in parent-teacher conferences
this week, last week.
They are showing up for our kids despite
uncertainty, and I am asking, and I hear
it. Member Richardson, I appreciate so much
you voicing that.
They're our greatest asset, and I think we all know that, but I just want to stand
here and end this meeting, I think,
thanking our teachers for showing up for our kids.
Also, another note, I was a teacher,
and I worked at a summer camp in the summer.
A lot of teachers don't take the summer off.
A lot of them have to work, and I think we need to be mindful in these
stipends and the time consideration for moving classrooms of this
magnitude. I worked at my camp during my last
week of school, and I had one day or
two, depending on when school started, before teacher in-service.
A lot of teachers have children home,
or they are working and they're balancing a lot.
They don't have the time that this plan seems to think that they do.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Sarah.
Seeing no further comment,
the second public comment is closed.
There were a couple questions. The first two were
both the same.
Will the board commit to another vote on reconfiguration? I can't answer that.
That's not for an individual board member to
answer. If a member wanted to bring
forth an action,
they could put in that action before the agenda,
and
that could come forward. But there's
no way that I can answer, or anybody up here can answer
the question as to whether the board would commit to
that. I don't
know.
The other thing I meant to say at the last
public comment, but
Ms. Edwards just brought it up again, about the future of
universal PTA, and I was going to say
the person who spoke about the
importance of the PTAs-- Oh, thank you.
The importance of the PTAs and
how we needed to secure them, and I think that that's something
that needs to be shared in a listening session, and I think that's something
that administration needs to
offer some assistance in helping to
sort of redo that, whatever that...
And I think that what
Ms. Edwards' idea was about doing a universal PTA,
and I think that's something that we've talked about before.
But the PTAs are really important, and so
how
does that structure
move forward?
So I appreciate that and highlighting that
for the administration as well.
I don't think there were other questions.
I got a couple.
Go ahead.
Yeah. There were just a question about the Skillen boiler, which I know we've-
Oh, thank you
... touched on before.
Yes.
But if we could just do briefly.
Yeah.
And then a question about were the roof repairs for Dyer and Kayler
included in this budget?
Yes. I'm going to turn that over, thank you, to the superintendent.
The first question about what would happen if something
happened to the Skillen boiler, and that was addressed.
Joe addressed it.
So-
Superintendent, go ahead
... I think that we've heard from Mike Nalley,
and he's done some research in terms of what would happen if the
boiler failed. And there is a temporary
system that can actually be brought in.
So I know that he's up on that, and
we should be in good hands with
how he'd be able to manage that. The other thing, just as an
aside,
the boiler
or the phases that
um, Skillin needs to go through,
might be the kind of
help that the
city council-
Correct
... may be able to-
Mm-hmm
... help with. Not-
Mm
... necessarily by paying it, but
there's been some talk of the possibility
of an interest-free loan or something like that.
Mm-hmm.
So,
yeah. So, I think we've got that
covered for right now.
And the other question was about the Kaylor Dyer roof.
Well, I just want to comment on-
Oh, I'm sorry. Please
... because Daniel and I visited that boiler not that long ago.
Mm.
Right? And I think some of the discussions seem to be around
trying to gradually shift away from that kind of heating system, if they
can, as opposed to trying to replace the whole boiler. Did you hear that?
I don't know. Was that the talk? Was it, no?
The two-
It was conjecture, but yeah.
I thought they were talking about that. To kind of go to heat pumps.
The, sorry, no. I can't
take any public comment, okay? I can-
All right, regardless.
I have a question.
I got it.
Can I repeat it?
I got it here.
Okay.
The second question was about the Kaylor Dyer roof repair.
No.
There's a second part.
Hold on.
Yeah. Okay, sorry.
What was the second...
Okay. Let's just get the Kaylor-
No, no, go for it
... Dyer roof repair question.
I think I got it.
You got it?
Go for it.
Okay, go ahead. Kaylor Dyer roof repairs.
What about it?
Just, is it included in this year's budget?
George.
Is it included in the budget, Abigail?
It's not. There's still a couple of those.
No, but that would be sort of wrapped up in some of the bond work.
It's a little different.
Hmm.
It could be a little different.
I'm sorry, Abigail, can you say that again? I didn't hear you.
No, that's not specifically in this year's annual budget.
It could be wrapped up in other bond work, the roof and security
bond.
Okay. A bond. Yeah, a bond was issued for that.
Was there an additional question from Danielle?
I'm sorry, now, was there another question, Member Richardson?
Yeah. The
question, can I ask a follow-up to what you just said?
So are we able to... We had a bond put
towards safety and the vestibule, I mean-
The security and vestibules, and then we have-
So we have Kaylor closing.
Mm-hmm.
Oh, never mind. My question doesn't make sense. I'm going to ireteg.
The question I think we're... Is where do students go when the
HVAC breaks
at Skillin? Hopefully, it doesn't, but if it breaks.
Well, they stay there, right?
Yeah, that was-
And freeze?
... that was the answer.
They bring in a temporary boiler.
Hold on.
Sure. It would be the model that we'd be looking at is bringing in a temporary
boiler so that those students would not be displaced.
So that would be the
solution that we'd be looking at, and that we've costed out to add to the
contingency.
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you. Any other... Did you have any other questions?
Nope.
I didn't either. Did anybody... Okay, thank you.
We are up to school board communications.
Oh, okay.
Does anybody have
announcements,
special things they want to say? Yeah, Daniel.
Yeah, two things. I've just started doing some diligence on what it
would look like for us to put additional solar panels on our schools
as a cost savings measure.
So definitely want to present that at the next board meeting.
I also just want to briefly apologize.
I said something relatively insensitive earlier in the meeting.
If you know, you know. But, yeah, I'm sorry about that.
Any other board communications?
Seeing none, without objection, this meeting is adjourned.
Thank you.